
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  عَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ

1  He frowned and turned away.

٢  أَنْ جَاءَهُ الْأَعْمَىٰ

2  When the blind man approached him.

٣  وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّهُ يَزَّكَّىٰ

3  But how do you know? Perhaps he was seeking to purify himself.

٤  أَوْ يَذَّكَّرُ فَتَنْفَعَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ

4  Or be reminded, and the message would benefit him.

٥  أَمَّا مَنِ اسْتَغْنَىٰ

5  But as for him who was indifferent.

٦  فَأَنْتَ لَهُ تَصَدَّىٰ

6  You gave him your attention.

٧  وَمَا عَلَيْكَ أَلَّا يَزَّكَّىٰ

7  Though you are not liable if he does not purify himself.

٨  وَأَمَّا مَنْ جَاءَكَ يَسْعَىٰ

8  But as for him who came to you seeking.

٩  وَهُوَ يَخْشَىٰ

9  In awe.

١٠  فَأَنْتَ عَنْهُ تَلَهَّىٰ

10  To him you were inattentive.

١١  كَلَّا إِنَّهَا تَذْكِرَةٌ

11  Do not. This is a Lesson.

١٢  فَمَنْ شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ

12  Whoever wills, shall remember it.

١٣  فِي صُحُفٍ مُكَرَّمَةٍ

13  On honorable pages.

١٤  مَرْفُوعَةٍ مُطَهَّرَةٍ

14  Exalted and purified.

١٥  بِأَيْدِي سَفَرَةٍ

15  By the hands of scribes.

١٦  كِرَامٍ بَرَرَةٍ

16  Noble and devoted.

١٧  قُتِلَ الْإِنْسَانُ مَا أَكْفَرَهُ

17  Perish man! How thankless he is!

١٨  مِنْ أَيِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ

18  From what did He create him?

١٩  مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ خَلَقَهُ فَقَدَّرَهُ

19  From a sperm drop He created him, and enabled him.

٢٠  ثُمَّ السَّبِيلَ يَسَّرَهُ

20  Then He eased the way for him.

٢١  ثُمَّ أَمَاتَهُ فَأَقْبَرَهُ

21  Then He puts him to death, and buries him.

٢٢  ثُمَّ إِذَا شَاءَ أَنْشَرَهُ

22  Then, when He wills, He will resurrect him.

٢٣  كَلَّا لَمَّا يَقْضِ مَا أَمَرَهُ

23  But no, he did not fulfill what He has commanded him.

٢٤  فَلْيَنْظُرِ الْإِنْسَانُ إِلَىٰ طَعَامِهِ

24  Let man consider his food.

٢٥  أَنَّا صَبَبْنَا الْمَاءَ صَبًّا

25  We pour down water in abundance.

٢٦  ثُمَّ شَقَقْنَا الْأَرْضَ شَقًّا

26  Then crack the soil open.

٢٧  فَأَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا حَبًّا

27  And grow in it grains.

٢٨  وَعِنَبًا وَقَضْبًا

28  And grapes and herbs.

٢٩  وَزَيْتُونًا وَنَخْلًا

29  And olives and dates.

٣٠  وَحَدَائِقَ غُلْبًا

30  And luscious gardens.

٣١  وَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبًّا

31  And fruits and vegetables.

٣٢  مَتَاعًا لَكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ

32  Enjoyment for you, and for your livestock.

٣٣  فَإِذَا جَاءَتِ الصَّاخَّةُ

33  But when the Deafening Noise comes to pass.

٣٤  يَوْمَ يَفِرُّ الْمَرْءُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ

34  The Day when a person will flee from his brother.

٣٥  وَأُمِّهِ وَأَبِيهِ

35  And his mother and his father.

٣٦  وَصَاحِبَتِهِ وَبَنِيهِ

36  And his consort and his children.

٣٧  لِكُلِّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ

37  Every one of them, on that Day, will have enough to preoccupy him.

٣٨  وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُسْفِرَةٌ

38  Faces on that Day will be radiant.

٣٩  ضَاحِكَةٌ مُسْتَبْشِرَةٌ

39  Laughing and rejoicing.

٤٠  وَوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَلَيْهَا غَبَرَةٌ

40  And Faces on that Day will be covered with misery.

٤١  تَرْهَقُهَا قَتَرَةٌ

41  Overwhelmed by remorse.

٤٢  أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَفَرَةُ الْفَجَرَةُ

42  These are the faithless, the vicious.