
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  حم

1  Ha, Meem.

٢  وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ

2  By the Enlightening Scripture.

٣  إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ ۚ إِنَّا كُنَّا مُنْذِرِينَ

3  We have revealed it on a Blessed Night-We have warned.

٤  فِيهَا يُفْرَقُ كُلُّ أَمْرٍ حَكِيمٍ

4  In it is distinguished every wise command.

٥  أَمْرًا مِنْ عِنْدِنَا ۚ إِنَّا كُنَّا مُرْسِلِينَ

5  A decree from Us. We have been sending messages.

٦  رَحْمَةً مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ

6  As mercy from your Lord. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

٧  رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُوقِنِينَ

7  Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, if you know for sure.

٨  لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ ۖ رَبُّكُمْ وَرَبُّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

8  There is no god but He. He gives life and causes death-your Lord and Lord of your ancestors of old.

٩  بَلْ هُمْ فِي شَكٍّ يَلْعَبُونَ

9  Yet they play around in doubt.

١٠  فَارْتَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُبِينٍ

10  So watch out for the Day when the sky produces a visible smoke.

١١  يَغْشَى النَّاسَ ۖ هَٰذَا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ

11  Enveloping mankind; this is a painful punishment.

١٢  رَبَّنَا اكْشِفْ عَنَّا الْعَذَابَ إِنَّا مُؤْمِنُونَ

12  "Our Lord, lift the torment from us, we are believers."

١٣  أَنَّىٰ لَهُمُ الذِّكْرَىٰ وَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ مُبِينٌ

13  But how can they be reminded? An enlightening messenger has already come to them.

١٤  ثُمَّ تَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ وَقَالُوا مُعَلَّمٌ مَجْنُونٌ

14  But they turned away from him, and said, "Educated, but crazy!"

١٥  إِنَّا كَاشِفُو الْعَذَابِ قَلِيلًا ۚ إِنَّكُمْ عَائِدُونَ

15  We will ease the punishment a little, but you will revert.

١٦  يَوْمَ نَبْطِشُ الْبَطْشَةَ الْكُبْرَىٰ إِنَّا مُنْتَقِمُونَ

16  The Day when We launch the Great Assault-We will avenge.

١٧  وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَجَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ كَرِيمٌ

17  Before them We tested the people of Pharaoh; a noble messenger came to them.

١٨  أَنْ أَدُّوا إِلَيَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ

18  Saying, "Hand over God's servants to me. I am an honest messenger to you."

١٩  وَأَنْ لَا تَعْلُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي آتِيكُمْ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ

19  And, "Do not exalt yourselves above God. I come to you with clear authority.

٢٠  وَإِنِّي عُذْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ أَنْ تَرْجُمُونِ

20  I have taken refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me.

٢١  وَإِنْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا لِي فَاعْتَزِلُونِ

21  But if you do not believe in me, keep away from me."

٢٢  فَدَعَا رَبَّهُ أَنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ قَوْمٌ مُجْرِمُونَ

22  He appealed to his Lord: "These are a sinful people."

٢٣  فَأَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي لَيْلًا إِنَّكُمْ مُتَّبَعُونَ

23  "Set out with My servants by night-you will be followed.

٢٤  وَاتْرُكِ الْبَحْرَ رَهْوًا ۖ إِنَّهُمْ جُنْدٌ مُغْرَقُونَ

24  And cross the sea quickly; they are an army to be drowned."

٢٥  كَمْ تَرَكُوا مِنْ جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

25  How many gardens and fountains did they leave behind?

٢٦  وَزُرُوعٍ وَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ

26  And plantations, and splendid buildings.

٢٧  وَنَعْمَةٍ كَانُوا فِيهَا فَاكِهِينَ

27  And comforts they used to enjoy.

٢٨  كَذَٰلِكَ ۖ وَأَوْرَثْنَاهَا قَوْمًا آخَرِينَ

28  So it was; and We passed it on to another people.

٢٩  فَمَا بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَا كَانُوا مُنْظَرِينَ

29  Neither heaven nor earth wept over them, nor were they reprieved.

٣٠  وَلَقَدْ نَجَّيْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْمُهِينِ

30  And We delivered the Children of Israel from the humiliating persecution.

٣١  مِنْ فِرْعَوْنَ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَالِيًا مِنَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ

31  From Pharaoh. He was a transgressing tyrant.

٣٢  وَلَقَدِ اخْتَرْنَاهُمْ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ

32  And We chose them knowingly over all other people.

٣٣  وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الْآيَاتِ مَا فِيهِ بَلَاءٌ مُبِينٌ

33  And We gave them many signs, in which was an obvious test.

٣٤  إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَيَقُولُونَ

34  These people say.

٣٥  إِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا مَوْتَتُنَا الْأُولَىٰ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُنْشَرِينَ

35  "There is nothing but our first death, and we will not be resurrected.

٣٦  فَأْتُوا بِآبَائِنَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ

36  Bring back our ancestors, if you are truthful."

٣٧  أَهُمْ خَيْرٌ أَمْ قَوْمُ تُبَّعٍ وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ ۚ أَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا مُجْرِمِينَ

37  Are they better, or the people of Tubba and those before them? We annihilated them. They were evildoers.

٣٨  وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا لَاعِبِينَ

38  We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them to play.

٣٩  مَا خَلَقْنَاهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ

39  We created them only for a specific purpose, but most of them do not know.

٤٠  إِنَّ يَوْمَ الْفَصْلِ مِيقَاتُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

40  The Day of Sorting Out is the appointed time for them all.

٤١  يَوْمَ لَا يُغْنِي مَوْلًى عَنْ مَوْلًى شَيْئًا وَلَا هُمْ يُنْصَرُونَ

41  The Day when no friend will avail a friend in any way, and they will not be helped.

٤٢  إِلَّا مَنْ رَحِمَ اللَّهُ ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

42  Except for him upon whom God has mercy. He is the Mighty, the Merciful.

٤٣  إِنَّ شَجَرَتَ الزَّقُّومِ

43  The Tree of Bitterness.

٤٤  طَعَامُ الْأَثِيمِ

44  The food of the sinner.

٤٥  كَالْمُهْلِ يَغْلِي فِي الْبُطُونِ

45  Like molten lead; boiling inside the bellies.

٤٦  كَغَلْيِ الْحَمِيمِ

46  Like the boiling of seething water.

٤٧  خُذُوهُ فَاعْتِلُوهُ إِلَىٰ سَوَاءِ الْجَحِيمِ

47  Seize him and drag him into the midst of Hell!

٤٨  ثُمَّ صُبُّوا فَوْقَ رَأْسِهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ الْحَمِيمِ

48  Then pour over his head the suffering of the Inferno!

٤٩  ذُقْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْكَرِيمُ

49  Taste! You who were powerful and noble.

٥٠  إِنَّ هَٰذَا مَا كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَمْتَرُونَ

50  This is what you used to doubt.

٥١  إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي مَقَامٍ أَمِينٍ

51  As for the righteous, they will be in a secure place.

٥٢  فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

52  Amidst gardens and springs.

٥٣  يَلْبَسُونَ مِنْ سُنْدُسٍ وَإِسْتَبْرَقٍ مُتَقَابِلِينَ

53  Dressed in silk and brocade, facing one another.

٥٤  كَذَٰلِكَ وَزَوَّجْنَاهُمْ بِحُورٍ عِينٍ

54  So it is, and We will wed them to lovely companions.

٥٥  يَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِكُلِّ فَاكِهَةٍ آمِنِينَ

55  They will call therein for every kind of fruit, in peace and security.

٥٦  لَا يَذُوقُونَ فِيهَا الْمَوْتَ إِلَّا الْمَوْتَةَ الْأُولَىٰ ۖ وَوَقَاهُمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ

56  Therein they will not taste death, beyond the first death; and He will protect them from the torment of Hell.

٥٧  فَضْلًا مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ

57  A favor from your Lord. That is the supreme salvation.

٥٨  فَإِنَّمَا يَسَّرْنَاهُ بِلِسَانِكَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ

58  We made it easy in your language, so that they may remember.

٥٩  فَارْتَقِبْ إِنَّهُمْ مُرْتَقِبُونَ

59  So wait and watch. They too are waiting and watching.