
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالذَّارِيَاتِ ذَرْوًا

1  By the spreaders spreading.

٢  فَالْحَامِلَاتِ وِقْرًا

2  And those carrying loads.

٣  فَالْجَارِيَاتِ يُسْرًا

3  And those moving gently.

٤  فَالْمُقَسِّمَاتِ أَمْرًا

4  And those distributing as commanded.

٥  إِنَّمَا تُوعَدُونَ لَصَادِقٌ

5  What you are promised is true.

٦  وَإِنَّ الدِّينَ لَوَاقِعٌ

6  Judgment will take place.

٧  وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْحُبُكِ

7  By the sky that is woven.

٨  إِنَّكُمْ لَفِي قَوْلٍ مُخْتَلِفٍ

8  You differ in what you say.

٩  يُؤْفَكُ عَنْهُ مَنْ أُفِكَ

9  Averted from it is he who is averted.

١٠  قُتِلَ الْخَرَّاصُونَ

10  Perish the imposters.

١١  الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي غَمْرَةٍ سَاهُونَ

11  Those who are dazed in ignorance.

١٢  يَسْأَلُونَ أَيَّانَ يَوْمُ الدِّينِ

12  They ask, "When is the Day of Judgment?"

١٣  يَوْمَ هُمْ عَلَى النَّارِ يُفْتَنُونَ

13  The Day they are presented to the Fire.

١٤  ذُوقُوا فِتْنَتَكُمْ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ

14  "Taste your ordeal. This is what you used to challenge."

١٥  إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

15  But the pious are amidst gardens and springs.

١٦  آخِذِينَ مَا آتَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَبْلَ ذَٰلِكَ مُحْسِنِينَ

16  Receiving what their Lord has given them. They were virtuous before that.

١٧  كَانُوا قَلِيلًا مِنَ اللَّيْلِ مَا يَهْجَعُونَ

17  They used to sleep a little at night.

١٨  وَبِالْأَسْحَارِ هُمْ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ

18  And at dawn, they would pray for pardon.

١٩  وَفِي أَمْوَالِهِمْ حَقٌّ لِلسَّائِلِ وَالْمَحْرُومِ

19  And in their wealth, there was a share for the beggar and the deprived.

٢٠  وَفِي الْأَرْضِ آيَاتٌ لِلْمُوقِنِينَ

20  And on earth are signs for the convinced.

٢١  وَفِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ ۚ أَفَلَا تُبْصِرُونَ

21  And within yourselves. Do you not see?

٢٢  وَفِي السَّمَاءِ رِزْقُكُمْ وَمَا تُوعَدُونَ

22  And in the heaven is your livelihood, and what you are promised.

٢٣  فَوَرَبِّ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ مِثْلَ مَا أَنَّكُمْ تَنْطِقُونَ

23  By the Lord of the heaven and the earth, it is as true as the fact that you speak.

٢٤  هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْمُكْرَمِينَ

24  Has the story of Abraham's honorable guests reached you?

٢٥  إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلَامًا ۖ قَالَ سَلَامٌ قَوْمٌ مُنْكَرُونَ

25  When they entered upon him, they said, "Peace." He said, "Peace, strangers."

٢٦  فَرَاغَ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ فَجَاءَ بِعِجْلٍ سَمِينٍ

26  Then he slipped away to his family, and brought a fatted calf.

٢٧  فَقَرَّبَهُ إِلَيْهِمْ قَالَ أَلَا تَأْكُلُونَ

27  He set it before them. He said, "Will you not eat?"

٢٨  فَأَوْجَسَ مِنْهُمْ خِيفَةً ۖ قَالُوا لَا تَخَفْ ۖ وَبَشَّرُوهُ بِغُلَامٍ عَلِيمٍ

28  And he harbored fear of them. They said, "Do not fear," and they announced to him the good news of a knowledgeable boy.

٢٩  فَأَقْبَلَتِ امْرَأَتُهُ فِي صَرَّةٍ فَصَكَّتْ وَجْهَهَا وَقَالَتْ عَجُوزٌ عَقِيمٌ

29  His wife came forward crying. She clasped her face, and said, "A barren old woman?"

٣٠  قَالُوا كَذَٰلِكِ قَالَ رَبُّكِ ۖ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْحَكِيمُ الْعَلِيمُ

30  They said, "Thus spoke your Lord. He is the Wise, the Knowing."

٣١  قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكُمْ أَيُّهَا الْمُرْسَلُونَ

31  He said, "What is your business, O envoys?"

٣٢  قَالُوا إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَىٰ قَوْمٍ مُجْرِمِينَ

32  They said, "We are sent to a people guilty of sin."

٣٣  لِنُرْسِلَ عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً مِنْ طِينٍ

33  "To unleash upon them rocks of clay."

٣٤  مُسَوَّمَةً عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ لِلْمُسْرِفِينَ

34  "Marked by your Lord for the excessive."

٣٥  فَأَخْرَجْنَا مَنْ كَانَ فِيهَا مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

35  We evacuated all the believers who were in it.

٣٦  فَمَا وَجَدْنَا فِيهَا غَيْرَ بَيْتٍ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ

36  But found in it only one household of Muslims.

٣٧  وَتَرَكْنَا فِيهَا آيَةً لِلَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ

37  And We left in it a sign for those who fear the painful punishment.

٣٨  وَفِي مُوسَىٰ إِذْ أَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ

38  And in Moses. We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authority.

٣٩  فَتَوَلَّىٰ بِرُكْنِهِ وَقَالَ سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ

39  But he turned away with his warlords, and said, "A sorcerer or a madman."

٤٠  فَأَخَذْنَاهُ وَجُنُودَهُ فَنَبَذْنَاهُمْ فِي الْيَمِّ وَهُوَ مُلِيمٌ

40  So We seized him and his troops, and threw them into the sea, and He was to blame.

٤١  وَفِي عَادٍ إِذْ أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمُ الرِّيحَ الْعَقِيمَ

41  And in Aad. We unleashed against them the devastating wind.

٤٢  مَا تَذَرُ مِنْ شَيْءٍ أَتَتْ عَلَيْهِ إِلَّا جَعَلَتْهُ كَالرَّمِيمِ

42  It spared nothing it came upon, but rendered it like decayed ruins.

٤٣  وَفِي ثَمُودَ إِذْ قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَمَتَّعُوا حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ

43  And in Thamood. They were told, "Enjoy yourselves for a while."

٤٤  فَعَتَوْا عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّاعِقَةُ وَهُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ

44  But they defied the command of their Lord, so the lightning struck them as they looked on.

٤٥  فَمَا اسْتَطَاعُوا مِنْ قِيَامٍ وَمَا كَانُوا مُنْتَصِرِينَ

45  They could not rise up, nor could they find help.

٤٦  وَقَوْمَ نُوحٍ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمًا فَاسِقِينَ

46  And before that, the people of Noah. They were immoral people.

٤٧  وَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ

47  We constructed the universe with power, and We are expanding it.

٤٨  وَالْأَرْضَ فَرَشْنَاهَا فَنِعْمَ الْمَاهِدُونَ

48  And the earth-We spread it out-How well We prepared it!

٤٩  وَمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ

49  We created all things in pairs, so that you may reflect and ponder.

٥٠  فَفِرُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ

50  "So flee towards God. I am to you from Him a clear warner."

٥١  وَلَا تَجْعَلُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ

51  "And do not set up any other god with God. I am to you from Him a clear warner."

٥٢  كَذَٰلِكَ مَا أَتَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا قَالُوا سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ

52  Likewise, no messenger came to those before them, but they said, "A sorcerer or a madman."

٥٣  أَتَوَاصَوْا بِهِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ طَاغُونَ

53  Did they recommend it to one another? In fact, they are rebellious people.

٥٤  فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ فَمَا أَنْتَ بِمَلُومٍ

54  So turn away from them; you are not to blame.

٥٥  وَذَكِّرْ فَإِنَّ الذِّكْرَىٰ تَنْفَعُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

55  And remind, for the reminder benefits the believers.

٥٦  وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ

56  I did not create the jinn and the humans except to worship Me.

٥٧  مَا أُرِيدُ مِنْهُمْ مِنْ رِزْقٍ وَمَا أُرِيدُ أَنْ يُطْعِمُونِ

57  I need no livelihood from them, nor do I need them to feed Me.

٥٨  إِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الرَّزَّاقُ ذُو الْقُوَّةِ الْمَتِينُ

58  God is the Provider, the One with Power, the Strong.

٥٩  فَإِنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا ذَنُوبًا مِثْلَ ذَنُوبِ أَصْحَابِهِمْ فَلَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونِ

59  Those who do wrong will have their turn, like the turn of their counterparts, so let them not rush Me.

٦٠  فَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ يَوْمِهِمُ الَّذِي يُوعَدُونَ

60  So woe to those who disbelieve because of that Day of theirs which they are promised.