
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوجِ

1  By the sky with the constellations.

٢  وَالْيَوْمِ الْمَوْعُودِ

2  And by the Promised Day.

٣  وَشَاهِدٍ وَمَشْهُودٍ

3  And by the witness and the witnessed.

٤  قُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ

4  Destroyed were the People of the Trench.

٥  النَّارِ ذَاتِ الْوَقُودِ

5  The fire supplied with fuel.

٦  إِذْ هُمْ عَلَيْهَا قُعُودٌ

6  While they sat around it.

٧  وَهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَفْعَلُونَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ شُهُودٌ

7  And were witnessing what they did to the believers.

٨  وَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَنْ يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ

8  They begrudged them only because they believed in God the Almighty, the Praiseworthy.

٩  الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ

9  To Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. God is witness over everything.

١٠  إِنَّ الَّذِينَ فَتَنُوا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَتُوبُوا فَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ جَهَنَّمَ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ الْحَرِيقِ

10  Those who tempt the believers, men and women, then do not repent; for them is the punishment of Hell; for them is the punishment of Burning.

١١  إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْكَبِيرُ

11  Those who believe and do righteous deeds will have Gardens beneath which rivers flow. That is the great triumph.

١٢  إِنَّ بَطْشَ رَبِّكَ لَشَدِيدٌ

12  The onslaught of your Lord is severe.

١٣  إِنَّهُ هُوَ يُبْدِئُ وَيُعِيدُ

13  It is He who begins and repeats.

١٤  وَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الْوَدُودُ

14  And He is the Forgiving, the Loving.

١٥  ذُو الْعَرْشِ الْمَجِيدُ

15  Possessor of the Glorious Throne.

١٦  فَعَّالٌ لِمَا يُرِيدُ

16  Doer of whatever He wills.

١٧  هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْجُنُودِ

17  Has there come to you the story of the legions?

١٨  فِرْعَوْنَ وَثَمُودَ

18  Of Pharaoh and Thamood?

١٩  بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي تَكْذِيبٍ

19  In fact, those who disbelieve are in denial.

٢٠  وَاللَّهُ مِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ مُحِيطٌ

20  And God encloses them from beyond.

٢١  بَلْ هُوَ قُرْآنٌ مَجِيدٌ

21  In fact, it is a Glorious Quran.

٢٢  فِي لَوْحٍ مَحْفُوظٍ

22  In a Preserved Tablet.