
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالْفَجْرِ

1  By the daybreak.

٢  وَلَيَالٍ عَشْرٍ

2  And ten nights.

٣  وَالشَّفْعِ وَالْوَتْرِ

3  And the even and the odd.

٤  وَاللَّيْلِ إِذَا يَسْرِ

4  And the night as it recedes.

٥  هَلْ فِي ذَٰلِكَ قَسَمٌ لِذِي حِجْرٍ

5  Is there in this an oath for a rational person?

٦  أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ بِعَادٍ

6  Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with Aad?

٧  إِرَمَ ذَاتِ الْعِمَادِ

7  Erum of the pillars.

٨  الَّتِي لَمْ يُخْلَقْ مِثْلُهَا فِي الْبِلَادِ

8  The like of which was never created in the land.

٩  وَثَمُودَ الَّذِينَ جَابُوا الصَّخْرَ بِالْوَادِ

9  And Thamood-those who carved the rocks in the valley.

١٠  وَفِرْعَوْنَ ذِي الْأَوْتَادِ

10  And Pharaoh of the Stakes.

١١  الَّذِينَ طَغَوْا فِي الْبِلَادِ

11  Those who committed excesses in the lands.

١٢  فَأَكْثَرُوا فِيهَا الْفَسَادَ

12  And spread much corruption therein.

١٣  فَصَبَّ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّكَ سَوْطَ عَذَابٍ

13  So your Lord poured down upon them a scourge of punishment.

١٤  إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ

14  Your Lord is on the lookout.

١٥  فَأَمَّا الْإِنْسَانُ إِذَا مَا ابْتَلَاهُ رَبُّهُ فَأَكْرَمَهُ وَنَعَّمَهُ فَيَقُولُ رَبِّي أَكْرَمَنِ

15  As for man, whenever his Lord tests him, and honors him, and prospers him, he says, "My Lord has honored me."

١٦  وَأَمَّا إِذَا مَا ابْتَلَاهُ فَقَدَرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقَهُ فَيَقُولُ رَبِّي أَهَانَنِ

16  But whenever He tests him, and restricts his livelihood for him, he says, "My Lord has insulted me."

١٧  كَلَّا ۖ بَلْ لَا تُكْرِمُونَ الْيَتِيمَ

17  Not at all. But you do not honor the orphan.

١٨  وَلَا تَحَاضُّونَ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ

18  And you do not urge the feeding of the poor.

١٩  وَتَأْكُلُونَ التُّرَاثَ أَكْلًا لَمًّا

19  And you devour inheritance with all greed.

٢٠  وَتُحِبُّونَ الْمَالَ حُبًّا جَمًّا

20  And you love wealth with immense love.

٢١  كَلَّا إِذَا دُكَّتِ الْأَرْضُ دَكًّا دَكًّا

21  No-when the earth is leveled, pounded, and crushed.

٢٢  وَجَاءَ رَبُّكَ وَالْمَلَكُ صَفًّا صَفًّا

22  And your Lord comes, with the angels, row after row.

٢٣  وَجِيءَ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِجَهَنَّمَ ۚ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنْسَانُ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ

23  And on that Day, Hell is brought forward. On that Day, man will remember, but how will remembrance avail him?

٢٤  يَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي قَدَّمْتُ لِحَيَاتِي

24  He will say, "If only I had forwarded for my life."

٢٥  فَيَوْمَئِذٍ لَا يُعَذِّبُ عَذَابَهُ أَحَدٌ

25  On that Day, none will punish as He punishes.

٢٦  وَلَا يُوثِقُ وَثَاقَهُ أَحَدٌ

26  And none will shackle as He shackles.

٢٧  يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ

27  But as for you, O tranquil soul.

٢٨  ارْجِعِي إِلَىٰ رَبِّكِ رَاضِيَةً مَرْضِيَّةً

28  Return to your Lord, pleased and accepted.

٢٩  فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي

29  Enter among My servants.

٣٠  وَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي

30  Enter My Paradise.