
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْغَاشِيَةِ

1  Has there come to you the news of the overwhelming?

٢  وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَاشِعَةٌ

2  Faces on that Day will be shamed.

٣  عَامِلَةٌ نَاصِبَةٌ

3  Laboring and exhausted.

٤  تَصْلَىٰ نَارًا حَامِيَةً

4  Roasting in a scorching Fire.

٥  تُسْقَىٰ مِنْ عَيْنٍ آنِيَةٍ

5  Given to drink from a flaming spring.

٦  لَيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ ضَرِيعٍ

6  They will have no food except thorns.

٧  لَا يُسْمِنُ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِنْ جُوعٍ

7  That neither nourishes, nor satisfies hunger.

٨  وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاعِمَةٌ

8  Faces on that Day will be joyful.

٩  لِسَعْيِهَا رَاضِيَةٌ

9  Satisfied with their endeavor.

١٠  فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ

10  In a lofty Garden.

١١  لَا تَسْمَعُ فِيهَا لَاغِيَةً

11  In it you will hear no nonsense.

١٢  فِيهَا عَيْنٌ جَارِيَةٌ

12  In it is a flowing spring.

١٣  فِيهَا سُرُرٌ مَرْفُوعَةٌ

13  In it are raised beds.

١٤  وَأَكْوَابٌ مَوْضُوعَةٌ

14  And cups set in place.

١٥  وَنَمَارِقُ مَصْفُوفَةٌ

15  And cushions set in rows.

١٦  وَزَرَابِيُّ مَبْثُوثَةٌ

16  And carpets spread around.

١٧  أَفَلَا يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَى الْإِبِلِ كَيْفَ خُلِقَتْ

17  Do they not look at the camels-how they are created?

١٨  وَإِلَى السَّمَاءِ كَيْفَ رُفِعَتْ

18  And at the sky-how it is raised?

١٩  وَإِلَى الْجِبَالِ كَيْفَ نُصِبَتْ

19  And at the mountains-how they are installed?

٢٠  وَإِلَى الْأَرْضِ كَيْفَ سُطِحَتْ

20  And at the earth-how it is spread out?

٢١  فَذَكِّرْ إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُذَكِّرٌ

21  So remind. You are only a reminder.

٢٢  لَسْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِمُصَيْطِرٍ

22  You have no control over them.

٢٣  إِلَّا مَنْ تَوَلَّىٰ وَكَفَرَ

23  But whoever turns away and disbelieves.

٢٤  فَيُعَذِّبُهُ اللَّهُ الْعَذَابَ الْأَكْبَرَ

24  God will punish him with the greatest punishment.

٢٥  إِنَّ إِلَيْنَا إِيَابَهُمْ

25  To Us is their return.

٢٦  ثُمَّ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا حِسَابَهُمْ

26  Then upon Us rests their reckoning.