
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  الْحَاقَّةُ

1  The Reality.

٢  مَا الْحَاقَّةُ

2  What is the Reality?

٣  وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْحَاقَّةُ

3  What will make you understand what the Reality is?

٤  كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ وَعَادٌ بِالْقَارِعَةِ

4  Thamood and Aad denied the Catastrophe.

٥  فَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِالطَّاغِيَةِ

5  As for Thamood, they were annihilated by the Overwhelming.

٦  وَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِرِيحٍ صَرْصَرٍ عَاتِيَةٍ

6  And as for Aad; they were annihilated by a furious, roaring wind.

٧  سَخَّرَهَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا فَتَرَى الْقَوْمَ فِيهَا صَرْعَىٰ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ خَاوِيَةٍ

7  He unleashed it upon them for seven nights and eight days, in succession. You could see the people tossed around, as though they were stumps of hollow palm-trees.

٨  فَهَلْ تَرَىٰ لَهُمْ مِنْ بَاقِيَةٍ

8  Can you see any remnant of them?

٩  وَجَاءَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَنْ قَبْلَهُ وَالْمُؤْتَفِكَاتُ بِالْخَاطِئَةِ

9  Then Pharaoh came, and those before him, and the Overturned Cities steeped in sin.

١٠  فَعَصَوْا رَسُولَ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَهُمْ أَخْذَةً رَابِيَةً

10  But they disobeyed the messenger of their Lord, so He seized them with an overpowering grip.

١١  إِنَّا لَمَّا طَغَى الْمَاءُ حَمَلْنَاكُمْ فِي الْجَارِيَةِ

11  When the waters overflowed, We carried you in the cruising ship.

١٢  لِنَجْعَلَهَا لَكُمْ تَذْكِرَةً وَتَعِيَهَا أُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ

12  To make it a lesson for you-so that retaining ears may retain it.

١٣  فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ نَفْخَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ

13  Then, when the Trumpet is sounded a single time.

١٤  وَحُمِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ فَدُكَّتَا دَكَّةً وَاحِدَةً

14  And the earth and the mountains are lifted up, and crushed, with a single crush.

١٥  فَيَوْمَئِذٍ وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ

15  On that Day, the Event will come to pass.

١٦  وَانْشَقَّتِ السَّمَاءُ فَهِيَ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاهِيَةٌ

16  And the heaven will crack; so on that Day it will be frail.

١٧  وَالْمَلَكُ عَلَىٰ أَرْجَائِهَا ۚ وَيَحْمِلُ عَرْشَ رَبِّكَ فَوْقَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ ثَمَانِيَةٌ

17  And the angels will be ranged around its borders, while eight will be carrying the Throne of your Lord above them that Day.

١٨  يَوْمَئِذٍ تُعْرَضُونَ لَا تَخْفَىٰ مِنْكُمْ خَافِيَةٌ

18  On that Day you will be exposed, and no secret of yours will remain hidden.

١٩  فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ فَيَقُولُ هَاؤُمُ اقْرَءُوا كِتَابِيَهْ

19  As for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will say, "Here, take my book and read it.

٢٠  إِنِّي ظَنَنْتُ أَنِّي مُلَاقٍ حِسَابِيَهْ

20  I knew I would be held accountable."

٢١  فَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَاضِيَةٍ

21  So he will be in pleasant living.

٢٢  فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ

22  In a lofty Garden.

٢٣  قُطُوفُهَا دَانِيَةٌ

23  Its pickings are within reach.

٢٤  كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الْأَيَّامِ الْخَالِيَةِ

24  "Eat and drink merrily for what you did in the days gone by."

٢٥  وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِشِمَالِهِ فَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَابِيَهْ

25  But as for him who is given his book in his left hand, he will say, "I wish I was never given my book.

٢٦  وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيَهْ

26  And never knew what my account was.

٢٧  يَا لَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ

27  If only it was the end.

٢٨  مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنِّي مَالِيَهْ ۜ

28  My money cannot avail me.

٢٩  هَلَكَ عَنِّي سُلْطَانِيَهْ

29  My power has vanished from me."

٣٠  خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ

30  "Take him and shackle him.

٣١  ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ

31  Then scorch him in the Blaze.

٣٢  ثُمَّ فِي سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فَاسْلُكُوهُ

32  Then in a chain which length is seventy cubits tie him up.

٣٣  إِنَّهُ كَانَ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ

33  For he would not believe in God the Great.

٣٤  وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ

34  Nor would he advocate the feeding of the destitute.

٣٥  فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَاهُنَا حَمِيمٌ

35  So he has no friend here today.

٣٦  وَلَا طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ

36  And no food except scum.

٣٧  لَا يَأْكُلُهُ إِلَّا الْخَاطِئُونَ

37  Which only the sinners eat."

٣٨  فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِمَا تُبْصِرُونَ

38  Indeed, I swear by what you see.

٣٩  وَمَا لَا تُبْصِرُونَ

39  And by what you do not see.

٤٠  إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ

40  It is the speech of a noble messenger.

٤١  وَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَاعِرٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تُؤْمِنُونَ

41  And it is not the speech of a poet-little do you believe.

٤٢  وَلَا بِقَوْلِ كَاهِنٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَذَكَّرُونَ

42  Nor is it the speech of a soothsayer-little do you take heed.

٤٣  تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

43  It is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.

٤٤  وَلَوْ تَقَوَّلَ عَلَيْنَا بَعْضَ الْأَقَاوِيلِ

44  Had he falsely attributed some statements to Us.

٤٥  لَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ

45  We would have seized him by the right arm.

٤٦  ثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ

46  Then slashed his lifeline.

٤٧  فَمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ

47  And none of you could have restrained Us from him.

٤٨  وَإِنَّهُ لَتَذْكِرَةٌ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ

48  Surely, it is a message for the righteous.

٤٩  وَإِنَّا لَنَعْلَمُ أَنَّ مِنْكُمْ مُكَذِّبِينَ

49  And We know that some of you will reject it.

٥٠  وَإِنَّهُ لَحَسْرَةٌ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ

50  And it is surely a source of grief for the unbelievers.

٥١  وَإِنَّهُ لَحَقُّ الْيَقِينِ

51  Yet it is the absolute truth.

٥٢  فَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ

52  So glorify the name of your Lord, the Magnificent.