
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  الر ۚ تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ وَقُرْآنٍ مُبِينٍ

1  Alif, Lam, Ra. These are the Verses of the Book; a Quran that makes things clear.

٢  رُبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ

2  Perhaps those who disbelieve will wish they had been Muslims.

٣  ذَرْهُمْ يَأْكُلُوا وَيَتَمَتَّعُوا وَيُلْهِهِمُ الْأَمَلُ ۖ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ

3  Leave them to eat, and enjoy, and be lulled by hope. They will find out.

٤  وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ إِلَّا وَلَهَا كِتَابٌ مَعْلُومٌ

4  We have never destroyed a town unless it had a set time.

٥  مَا تَسْبِقُ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ أَجَلَهَا وَمَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ

5  No nation can bring its time forward, nor can they delay it.

٦  وَقَالُوا يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِي نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ إِنَّكَ لَمَجْنُونٌ

6  And they said, "O you who received the message, you are insane."

٧  لَوْ مَا تَأْتِينَا بِالْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ

7  Why do you not bring us the angels, if you are truthful?"

٨  مَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَمَا كَانُوا إِذًا مُنْظَرِينَ

8  We do not send the angels down except with reason, and they will not be held back.

٩  إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ

9  Surely We revealed the Message, and We will surely preserve it.

١٠  وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فِي شِيَعِ الْأَوَّلِينَ

10  We sent others before you, to the former communities.

١١  وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ

11  But no messenger came to them, but they ridiculed him.

١٢  كَذَٰلِكَ نَسْلُكُهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ

12  Thus We slip it into the hearts of the guilty.

١٣  لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ ۖ وَقَدْ خَلَتْ سُنَّةُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

13  They do not believe in it, though the ways of the ancients have passed away.

١٤  وَلَوْ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ بَابًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَظَلُّوا فِيهِ يَعْرُجُونَ

14  Even if We opened for them a gateway into the sky, and they began to ascend through it.

١٥  لَقَالُوا إِنَّمَا سُكِّرَتْ أَبْصَارُنَا بَلْ نَحْنُ قَوْمٌ مَسْحُورُونَ

15  They would still say, "Our eyes are hallucinating; in fact, we are people bewitched."

١٦  وَلَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجًا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا لِلنَّاظِرِينَ

16  We placed constellations in the sky, and made them beautiful to the beholders.

١٧  وَحَفِظْنَاهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ رَجِيمٍ

17  And We guarded them from every outcast devil.

١٨  إِلَّا مَنِ اسْتَرَقَ السَّمْعَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ مُبِينٌ

18  Except one who steals a hearing, and is followed by a visible projectile.

١٩  وَالْأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مَوْزُونٍ

19  We spread the earth, and placed stabilizers in it, and in it We grew all things in proper measure.

٢٠  وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَعَايِشَ وَمَنْ لَسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ

20  And in it We created livelihoods for you, and for those for whom you are not the providers.

٢١  وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا عِنْدَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ وَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ إِلَّا بِقَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ

21  There is not a thing but with Us are its stores, and We send it down only in precise measure.

٢٢  وَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ فَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمُوهُ وَمَا أَنْتُمْ لَهُ بِخَازِنِينَ

22  We send the fertilizing winds; and send down water from the sky, and give it to you to drink, and you are not the ones who store it.

٢٣  وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ نُحْيِي وَنُمِيتُ وَنَحْنُ الْوَارِثُونَ

23  It is We who give life and cause death, and We are the Inheritors.

٢٤  وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنْكُمْ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَأْخِرِينَ

24  And We know those of you who go forward, and We know those who lag behind.

٢٥  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُ حَكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ

25  It is your Lord who will gather them together. He is the Wise, the Knowing.

٢٦  وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ

26  We created the human being from clay, from molded mud.

٢٧  وَالْجَانَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ مِنْ نَارِ السَّمُومِ

27  And the jinn We created before, from piercing fire.

٢٨  وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ

28  Your Lord said to the angels, "I am creating a human being from clay, from molded mud."

٢٩  فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ سَاجِدِينَ

29  "When I have formed him, and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down prostrating before him."

٣٠  فَسَجَدَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ

30  So the angels prostrated themselves, all together.

٣١  إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ أَبَىٰ أَنْ يَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ

31  Except for Satan. He refused to be among those who prostrated themselves.

٣٢  قَالَ يَا إِبْلِيسُ مَا لَكَ أَلَّا تَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ

32  He said, "O Satan, what kept you from being among those who prostrated themselves?"

٣٣  قَالَ لَمْ أَكُنْ لِأَسْجُدَ لِبَشَرٍ خَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ

33  He said, "I am not about to prostrate myself before a human being, whom You created from clay, from molded mud."

٣٤  قَالَ فَاخْرُجْ مِنْهَا فَإِنَّكَ رَجِيمٌ

34  He said, "Then get out of here, for you are an outcast".

٣٥  وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكَ اللَّعْنَةَ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ

35  "And the curse will be upon you until the Day of Judgment."

٣٦  قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنْظِرْنِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ

36  He said, "My Lord, reprieve me until the Day they are resurrected."

٣٧  قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنَ الْمُنْظَرِينَ

37  He said, "You are of those reprieved."

٣٨  إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ

38  "Until the Day of the time appointed."

٣٩  قَالَ رَبِّ بِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي لَأُزَيِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

39  He said, "My Lord, since You have lured me away, I will glamorize for them on earth, and I will lure them all away."

٤٠  إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

40  "Except for Your sincere servants among them."

٤١  قَالَ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ عَلَيَّ مُسْتَقِيمٌ

41  He said, "This is a right way with Me."

٤٢  إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ إِلَّا مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ

42  "Over My servants you have no authority, except for the sinners who follow you."

٤٣  وَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمَوْعِدُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

43  And Hell is the meeting-place for them all.

٤٤  لَهَا سَبْعَةُ أَبْوَابٍ لِكُلِّ بَابٍ مِنْهُمْ جُزْءٌ مَقْسُومٌ

44  "It has seven doors; for each door is an assigned class."

٤٥  إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

45  But the righteous will be in gardens with springs.

٤٦  ادْخُلُوهَا بِسَلَامٍ آمِنِينَ

46  "Enter it in peace and security."

٤٧  وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِمْ مِنْ غِلٍّ إِخْوَانًا عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مُتَقَابِلِينَ

47  And We will remove all ill-feelings from their hearts-brothers and sisters, on couches facing one another.

٤٨  لَا يَمَسُّهُمْ فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَمَا هُمْ مِنْهَا بِمُخْرَجِينَ

48  No fatigue will ever touch them therein, nor will they be asked to leave it.

٤٩  نَبِّئْ عِبَادِي أَنِّي أَنَا الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ

49  Inform My servants that I am the Forgiver, the Merciful.

٥٠  وَأَنَّ عَذَابِي هُوَ الْعَذَابُ الْأَلِيمُ

50  And that My punishment is the painful punishment.

٥١  وَنَبِّئْهُمْ عَنْ ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ

51  And inform them of the guests of Abraham.

٥٢  إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلَامًا قَالَ إِنَّا مِنْكُمْ وَجِلُونَ

52  When they entered upon him, and said, "Peace." He said, "We are wary of you."

٥٣  قَالُوا لَا تَوْجَلْ إِنَّا نُبَشِّرُكَ بِغُلَامٍ عَلِيمٍ

53  They said, "Do not fear; we bring you good news of a boy endowed with knowledge."

٥٤  قَالَ أَبَشَّرْتُمُونِي عَلَىٰ أَنْ مَسَّنِيَ الْكِبَرُ فَبِمَ تُبَشِّرُونَ

54  He said, "Do you bring me good news, when old age has overtaken me? What good news do you bring?"

٥٥  قَالُوا بَشَّرْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلَا تَكُنْ مِنَ الْقَانِطِينَ

55  They said, "We bring you good news in truth, so do not despair."

٥٦  قَالَ وَمَنْ يَقْنَطُ مِنْ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّهِ إِلَّا الضَّالُّونَ

56  He said, "And who despairs of his Lord's mercy but the lost?"

٥٧  قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكُمْ أَيُّهَا الْمُرْسَلُونَ

57  He said, "So what is your business, O envoys?"

٥٨  قَالُوا إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَىٰ قَوْمٍ مُجْرِمِينَ

58  They said, "We were sent to a sinful people."

٥٩  إِلَّا آلَ لُوطٍ إِنَّا لَمُنَجُّوهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

59  "Except for the family of Lot; we will save them all."

٦٠  إِلَّا امْرَأَتَهُ قَدَّرْنَا ۙ إِنَّهَا لَمِنَ الْغَابِرِينَ

60  "Except for his wife." We have determined that she will be of those who lag behind.

٦١  فَلَمَّا جَاءَ آلَ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلُونَ

61  And when the envoys came to the family of Lot.

٦٢  قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ قَوْمٌ مُنْكَرُونَ

62  He said, "You are a people unknown to me."

٦٣  قَالُوا بَلْ جِئْنَاكَ بِمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَمْتَرُونَ

63  They said, "We bring you what they have doubts about."

٦٤  وَأَتَيْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ

64  "We bring you the truth, and we are truthful."

٦٥  فَأَسْرِ بِأَهْلِكَ بِقِطْعٍ مِنَ اللَّيْلِ وَاتَّبِعْ أَدْبَارَهُمْ وَلَا يَلْتَفِتْ مِنْكُمْ أَحَدٌ وَامْضُوا حَيْثُ تُؤْمَرُونَ

65  "Travel with your family at the dead of the night, and follow up behind them, and let none of you look back, and proceed as commanded."

٦٦  وَقَضَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ ذَٰلِكَ الْأَمْرَ أَنَّ دَابِرَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ مَقْطُوعٌ مُصْبِحِينَ

66  And We informed him of Our decree: the last remnant of these will be uprooted by early morning.

٦٧  وَجَاءَ أَهْلُ الْمَدِينَةِ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ

67  And the people of the town came joyfully.

٦٨  قَالَ إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ ضَيْفِي فَلَا تَفْضَحُونِ

68  He said, "These are my guests, so do not embarrass me."

٦٩  وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلَا تُخْزُونِ

69  "And fear God, and do not disgrace me."

٧٠  قَالُوا أَوَلَمْ نَنْهَكَ عَنِ الْعَالَمِينَ

70  They said, "Did we not forbid you from strangers?"

٧١  قَالَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ بَنَاتِي إِنْ كُنْتُمْ فَاعِلِينَ

71  He said, "These are my daughters, if you must."

٧٢  لَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ

72  By your life, they were blundering in their drunkenness.

٧٣  فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُشْرِقِينَ

73  So the Blast struck them at sunrise.

٧٤  فَجَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً مِنْ سِجِّيلٍ

74  And We turned it upside down, and rained down upon them stones of baked clay.

٧٥  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ

75  Surely in that are lessons for those who read signs.

٧٦  وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُقِيمٍ

76  And it is on an existing road.

٧٧  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ

77  Surely in that is a sign for the believers.

٧٨  وَإِنْ كَانَ أَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ لَظَالِمِينَ

78  The people of the Woods were also wrongdoers.

٧٩  فَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ وَإِنَّهُمَا لَبِإِمَامٍ مُبِينٍ

79  So We took revenge upon them. Both are clearly documented.

٨٠  وَلَقَدْ كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْحِجْرِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

80  The people of the Rock also rejected the messengers.

٨١  وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ آيَاتِنَا فَكَانُوا عَنْهَا مُعْرِضِينَ

81  We gave them Our revelations, but they turned away from them.

٨٢  وَكَانُوا يَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا آمِنِينَ

82  They used to carve homes in the mountains, feeling secure.

٨٣  فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُصْبِحِينَ

83  But the Blast struck them in the morning.

٨٤  فَمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ

84  All they had acquired was of no avail to them.

٨٥  وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ ۗ وَإِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لَآتِيَةٌ ۖ فَاصْفَحِ الصَّفْحَ الْجَمِيلَ

85  We did not create the heavens and the earth, and what lies between them, except with truth. The Hour is coming, so forgive with gracious forgiveness.

٨٦  إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ

86  Your Lord is the All-Knowing Creator.

٨٧  وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَاكَ سَبْعًا مِنَ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْآنَ الْعَظِيمَ

87  We have given you seven of the pairs, and the Grand Quran.

٨٨  لَا تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَىٰ مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجًا مِنْهُمْ وَلَا تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ

88  Do not extend your eyes towards what We have bestowed on some couples of them to enjoy, and do not grieve over them, and lower your wing to the believers.

٨٩  وَقُلْ إِنِّي أَنَا النَّذِيرُ الْمُبِينُ

89  And say, "I am the clear warner."

٩٠  كَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَى الْمُقْتَسِمِينَ

90  Just as We sent down to the separatists.

٩١  الَّذِينَ جَعَلُوا الْقُرْآنَ عِضِينَ

91  Those who made the Quran obsolete.

٩٢  فَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

92  By your Lord, we will question them all.

٩٣  عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ

93  About what they used to do.

٩٤  فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ

94  So proclaim openly what you are commanded, and turn away from the polytheists.

٩٥  إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ

95  We are enough for you against the mockers.

٩٦  الَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۚ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ

96  Those who set up another god with God. They will come to know.

٩٧  وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ

97  We are aware that your heart is strained by what they say.

٩٨  فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُنْ مِنَ السَّاجِدِينَ

98  So glorify the praise of your Lord, and be among those who bow down.

٩٩  وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ

99  And worship your Lord in order to attain certainty.