
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  هَلْ أَتَىٰ عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ حِينٌ مِنَ الدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُنْ شَيْئًا مَذْكُورًا

1  Has there come upon man a period of time when he was nothing to be mentioned?

٢  إِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ نَبْتَلِيهِ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا

2  We created man from a liquid mixture, to test him; and We made him hearing and seeing.

٣  إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا

3  We guided him to the way, be he appreciative or unappreciative.

٤  إِنَّا أَعْتَدْنَا لِلْكَافِرِينَ سَلَاسِلَ وَأَغْلَالًا وَسَعِيرًا

4  We have prepared for the faithless chains, and yokes, and a Searing Fire.

٥  إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ يَشْرَبُونَ مِنْ كَأْسٍ كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا كَافُورًا

5  But the righteous will drink from a cup whose mixture is aroma.

٦  عَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا عِبَادُ اللَّهِ يُفَجِّرُونَهَا تَفْجِيرًا

6  A spring from which the servants of God will drink, making it gush abundantly.

٧  يُوفُونَ بِالنَّذْرِ وَيَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا كَانَ شَرُّهُ مُسْتَطِيرًا

7  They fulfill their vows, and dread a Day whose ill is widespread.

٨  وَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا وَأَسِيرًا

8  And they feed, for the love of Him, the poor, and the orphan, and the captive.

٩  إِنَّمَا نُطْعِمُكُمْ لِوَجْهِ اللَّهِ لَا نُرِيدُ مِنْكُمْ جَزَاءً وَلَا شُكُورًا

9  "We only feed you for the sake of God. We want from you neither compensation, nor gratitude.

١٠  إِنَّا نَخَافُ مِنْ رَبِّنَا يَوْمًا عَبُوسًا قَمْطَرِيرًا

10  We dread from our Lord a frowning grim Day."

١١  فَوَقَاهُمُ اللَّهُ شَرَّ ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمِ وَلَقَّاهُمْ نَضْرَةً وَسُرُورًا

11  So God will protect them from the ills of that Day, and will grant them radiance and joy.

١٢  وَجَزَاهُمْ بِمَا صَبَرُوا جَنَّةً وَحَرِيرًا

12  And will reward them for their patience with a Garden and silk.

١٣  مُتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ ۖ لَا يَرَوْنَ فِيهَا شَمْسًا وَلَا زَمْهَرِيرًا

13  Reclining therein on the thrones; experiencing therein neither sun, nor frost.

١٤  وَدَانِيَةً عَلَيْهِمْ ظِلَالُهَا وَذُلِّلَتْ قُطُوفُهَا تَذْلِيلًا

14  Its shade hovering over them, and its fruit brought low within reach.

١٥  وَيُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِآنِيَةٍ مِنْ فِضَّةٍ وَأَكْوَابٍ كَانَتْ قَوَارِيرَا

15  Passing around them are vessels of silver, and cups of crystal.

١٦  قَوَارِيرَ مِنْ فِضَّةٍ قَدَّرُوهَا تَقْدِيرًا

16  Crystal of silver-they measured them exactly.

١٧  وَيُسْقَوْنَ فِيهَا كَأْسًا كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا زَنْجَبِيلًا

17  They will be served therein with a cup whose flavor is Zanjabeel.

١٨  عَيْنًا فِيهَا تُسَمَّىٰ سَلْسَبِيلًا

18  A spring therein named Salsabeel.

١٩  وَيَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ وِلْدَانٌ مُخَلَّدُونَ إِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ حَسِبْتَهُمْ لُؤْلُؤًا مَنْثُورًا

19  Passing among them are eternalized youths. If you see them, you would think them sprinkled pearls.

٢٠  وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ ثَمَّ رَأَيْتَ نَعِيمًا وَمُلْكًا كَبِيرًا

20  Wherever you look, you see bliss, and a vast kingdom.

٢١  عَالِيَهُمْ ثِيَابُ سُنْدُسٍ خُضْرٌ وَإِسْتَبْرَقٌ ۖ وَحُلُّوا أَسَاوِرَ مِنْ فِضَّةٍ وَسَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ شَرَابًا طَهُورًا

21  Upon them are garments of green silk, and satin. And they will be adorned with bracelets of silver. And their Lord will offer them a pure drink.

٢٢  إِنَّ هَٰذَا كَانَ لَكُمْ جَزَاءً وَكَانَ سَعْيُكُمْ مَشْكُورًا

22  "This is a reward for you. Your efforts are well appreciated."

٢٣  إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ تَنْزِيلًا

23  It is We who sent down the Quran upon you-a gradual revelation.

٢٤  فَاصْبِرْ لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ وَلَا تُطِعْ مِنْهُمْ آثِمًا أَوْ كَفُورًا

24  So be patient for the decision of your Lord, and do not obey the sinner or the blasphemer among them.

٢٥  وَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا

25  And mention the Name of your Lord, morning and evening.

٢٦  وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَاسْجُدْ لَهُ وَسَبِّحْهُ لَيْلًا طَوِيلًا

26  And for part of the night, prostrate yourself to Him, and glorify Him long into the night.

٢٧  إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ يُحِبُّونَ الْعَاجِلَةَ وَيَذَرُونَ وَرَاءَهُمْ يَوْمًا ثَقِيلًا

27  As for these: they love the fleeting life, and leave behind a Heavy Day.

٢٨  نَحْنُ خَلَقْنَاهُمْ وَشَدَدْنَا أَسْرَهُمْ ۖ وَإِذَا شِئْنَا بَدَّلْنَا أَمْثَالَهُمْ تَبْدِيلًا

28  We created them, and strengthened their frame; and whenever We will, We can replace them with others like them.

٢٩  إِنَّ هَٰذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ ۖ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ سَبِيلًا

29  This is a reminder; so whoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord.

٣٠  وَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا

30  Yet you cannot will, unless God wills. God is Knowing and Wise.

٣١  يُدْخِلُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ ۚ وَالظَّالِمِينَ أَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا

31  He admits into His mercy whomever He wills. But as for the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful punishment.