
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  إِذَا السَّمَاءُ انْشَقَّتْ

1  When the sky is ruptured.

٢  وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ

2  And hearkens to its Lord, as it must.

٣  وَإِذَا الْأَرْضُ مُدَّتْ

3  And when the earth is leveled out.

٤  وَأَلْقَتْ مَا فِيهَا وَتَخَلَّتْ

4  And casts out what is in it, and becomes empty.

٥  وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ

5  And hearkens to its Lord, as it must.

٦  يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنْسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ كَدْحًا فَمُلَاقِيهِ

6  O man! You are laboring towards your Lord, and you will meet Him.

٧  فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ

7  As for him who is given his book in his right hand.

٨  فَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا

8  He will have an easy settlement.

٩  وَيَنْقَلِبُ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا

9  And will return to his family delighted.

١٠  وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ وَرَاءَ ظَهْرِهِ

10  But as for him who is given his book behind his back.

١١  فَسَوْفَ يَدْعُو ثُبُورًا

11  He will call for death.

١٢  وَيَصْلَىٰ سَعِيرًا

12  And will enter the Blaze.

١٣  إِنَّهُ كَانَ فِي أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا

13  He used to be happy among his family.

١٤  إِنَّهُ ظَنَّ أَنْ لَنْ يَحُورَ

14  He thought he would never return.

١٥  بَلَىٰ إِنَّ رَبَّهُ كَانَ بِهِ بَصِيرًا

15  In fact, his Lord was watching him.

١٦  فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالشَّفَقِ

16  I swear by the twilight.

١٧  وَاللَّيْلِ وَمَا وَسَقَ

17  And by the night, and what it covers.

١٨  وَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا اتَّسَقَ

18  And by the moon, as it grows full.

١٩  لَتَرْكَبُنَّ طَبَقًا عَنْ طَبَقٍ

19  You will mount stage by stage.

٢٠  فَمَا لَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ

20  What is the matter with them that they do not believe?

٢١  وَإِذَا قُرِئَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقُرْآنُ لَا يَسْجُدُونَ ۩

21  And when the Quran is read to them, they do not bow down?

٢٢  بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يُكَذِّبُونَ

22  In fact, those who disbelieve are in denial.

٢٣  وَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يُوعُونَ

23  But God knows what they hide inside.

٢٤  فَبَشِّرْهُمْ بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ

24  So inform them of a painful punishment.

٢٥  إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ

25  Except those who believe and do good deeds; they will have an undiminished reward.