
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  قُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَقَالُوا إِنَّا سَمِعْنَا قُرْآنًا عَجَبًا

1  Say, "It was revealed to me that a band of jinn listened in, and said, 'We have heard a wondrous Quran.

٢  يَهْدِي إِلَى الرُّشْدِ فَآمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ وَلَنْ نُشْرِكَ بِرَبِّنَا أَحَدًا

2  It guides to rectitude, so we have believed in it; and we will never associate anyone with our Lord.

٣  وَأَنَّهُ تَعَالَىٰ جَدُّ رَبِّنَا مَا اتَّخَذَ صَاحِبَةً وَلَا وَلَدًا

3  And Exalted is the Grandeur of our Lord-He never had a mate, nor a child.

٤  وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ سَفِيهُنَا عَلَى اللَّهِ شَطَطًا

4  But the fools among us used to say nonsense about God.

٥  وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ تَقُولَ الْإِنْسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا

5  And we thought that humans and jinn would never utter lies about God.

٦  وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَالٌ مِنَ الْإِنْسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا

6  Some individual humans used to seek power through some individual jinn, but they only increased them in confusion.

٧  وَأَنَّهُمْ ظَنُّوا كَمَا ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ لَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ أَحَدًا

7  They thought, as you thought, that God would never resurrect anyone.

٨  وَأَنَّا لَمَسْنَا السَّمَاءَ فَوَجَدْنَاهَا مُلِئَتْ حَرَسًا شَدِيدًا وَشُهُبًا

8  We probed the heaven, and found it filled with stern guards and projectiles.

٩  وَأَنَّا كُنَّا نَقْعُدُ مِنْهَا مَقَاعِدَ لِلسَّمْعِ ۖ فَمَنْ يَسْتَمِعِ الْآنَ يَجِدْ لَهُ شِهَابًا رَصَدًا

9  We used to take up positions to listen in; but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him.

١٠  وَأَنَّا لَا نَدْرِي أَشَرٌّ أُرِيدَ بِمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ أَرَادَ بِهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ رَشَدًا

10  We do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth, or if their Lord intends goodness for them.

١١  وَأَنَّا مِنَّا الصَّالِحُونَ وَمِنَّا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ كُنَّا طَرَائِقَ قِدَدًا

11  Some of us are righteous, but some of us are less than that; we follow divergent paths.

١٢  وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ نُعْجِزَ اللَّهَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَنْ نُعْجِزَهُ هَرَبًا

12  We realized that we cannot defeat God on earth, and that we cannot escape Him by fleeing.

١٣  وَأَنَّا لَمَّا سَمِعْنَا الْهُدَىٰ آمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ فَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِرَبِّهِ فَلَا يَخَافُ بَخْسًا وَلَا رَهَقًا

13  And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. Whoever believes in his Lord fears neither loss, nor burden.

١٤  وَأَنَّا مِنَّا الْمُسْلِمُونَ وَمِنَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ ۖ فَمَنْ أَسْلَمَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ تَحَرَّوْا رَشَدًا

14  Among us are those who are submitting, and among us are the compromisers. As for those who have submitted-it is they who pursue rectitude.

١٥  وَأَمَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ فَكَانُوا لِجَهَنَّمَ حَطَبًا

15  But as for the compromisers-they will be firewood for Hell.'"

١٦  وَأَنْ لَوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ لَأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً غَدَقًا

16  Had they kept true to the Path, We would have given them plenty water to drink.

١٧  لِنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يُعْرِضْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ يَسْلُكْهُ عَذَابًا صَعَدًا

17  To test them with it. Whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will direct him to torment ever mounting.

١٨  وَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا

18  The places of worship are for God. So do not call, besides God, upon anyone else.

١٩  وَأَنَّهُ لَمَّا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُوا يَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا

19  And when the servant of God got up calling on Him, they almost fell on him in a mass.

٢٠  قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَدْعُو رَبِّي وَلَا أُشْرِكُ بِهِ أَحَدًا

20  Say, "I pray only to my Lord, and I never associate anyone with Him."

٢١  قُلْ إِنِّي لَا أَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا وَلَا رَشَدًا

21  Say, "It is not in my power to harm you, nor to bring you to right conduct."

٢٢  قُلْ إِنِّي لَنْ يُجِيرَنِي مِنَ اللَّهِ أَحَدٌ وَلَنْ أَجِدَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مُلْتَحَدًا

22  Say, "No one can protect me from God, and I will not find any refuge except with Him.

٢٣  إِلَّا بَلَاغًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِسَالَاتِهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يَعْصِ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَإِنَّ لَهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا

23  Except for a proclamation from God and His messages. He who defies God and His Messenger-for him is the Fire of Hell, in which they will dwell forever."

٢٤  حَتَّىٰ إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ أَضْعَفُ نَاصِرًا وَأَقَلُّ عَدَدًا

24  Until, when they see what they were promised, they will know who is weaker in helpers, and fewer in numbers.

٢٥  قُلْ إِنْ أَدْرِي أَقَرِيبٌ مَا تُوعَدُونَ أَمْ يَجْعَلُ لَهُ رَبِّي أَمَدًا

25  Say, "I do not know whether what you are promised is near, or whether my Lord will extend it for a period."

٢٦  عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا

26  The Knower of the Invisible; He does not disclose His Invisible to anyone.

٢٧  إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِنْ رَسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا

27  Except to a Messenger of His choosing. He then dispatches guards before him and behind him.

٢٨  لِيَعْلَمَ أَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا

28  That He may know that they have conveyed the messages of their Lord. He encompasses what they have, and has tallied everything by number.