
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ

1  O you Enrobed one.

٢  قُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ

2  Arise and warn.

٣  وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ

3  And magnify your Lord.

٤  وَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ

4  And purify your clothes.

٥  وَالرُّجْزَ فَاهْجُرْ

5  And abandon abominations.

٦  وَلَا تَمْنُنْ تَسْتَكْثِرُ

6  And show no favor seeking gain.

٧  وَلِرَبِّكَ فَاصْبِرْ

7  And be constant for your Lord.

٨  فَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ

8  When the Trumpet is blown.

٩  فَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوْمٌ عَسِيرٌ

9  That Day will be a difficult day.

١٠  عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ غَيْرُ يَسِيرٍ

10  For the disbelievers-not easy.

١١  ذَرْنِي وَمَنْ خَلَقْتُ وَحِيدًا

11  Leave Me to him whom I created alone.

١٢  وَجَعَلْتُ لَهُ مَالًا مَمْدُودًا

12  And gave him vast wealth.

١٣  وَبَنِينَ شُهُودًا

13  And children as witnesses.

١٤  وَمَهَّدْتُ لَهُ تَمْهِيدًا

14  And smoothed things for him.

١٥  ثُمَّ يَطْمَعُ أَنْ أَزِيدَ

15  Then he wants Me to add yet more!

١٦  كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ لِآيَاتِنَا عَنِيدًا

16  By no means! He was stubborn towards Our revelations.

١٧  سَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا

17  I will exhaust him increasingly.

١٨  إِنَّهُ فَكَّرَ وَقَدَّرَ

18  He thought and analyzed.

١٩  فَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ

19  May he perish, how he analyzed.

٢٠  ثُمَّ قُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ

20  Again: may he perish, how he analyzed.

٢١  ثُمَّ نَظَرَ

21  Then he looked.

٢٢  ثُمَّ عَبَسَ وَبَسَرَ

22  Then he frowned and whined.

٢٣  ثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ وَاسْتَكْبَرَ

23  Then he turned back and was proud.

٢٤  فَقَالَ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ يُؤْثَرُ

24  And said, "This is nothing but magic from the past.

٢٥  إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا قَوْلُ الْبَشَرِ

25  This is nothing but the word of a mortal."

٢٦  سَأُصْلِيهِ سَقَرَ

26  I will roast him in Saqar.

٢٧  وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سَقَرُ

27  But what will explain to you what Saqar is?

٢٨  لَا تُبْقِي وَلَا تَذَرُ

28  It neither leaves, nor spares.

٢٩  لَوَّاحَةٌ لِلْبَشَرِ

29  It scorches the flesh.

٣٠  عَلَيْهَا تِسْعَةَ عَشَرَ

30  Over it are Nineteen.

٣١  وَمَا جَعَلْنَا أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ إِلَّا مَلَائِكَةً ۙ وَمَا جَعَلْنَا عِدَّتَهُمْ إِلَّا فِتْنَةً لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِيَسْتَيْقِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَيَزْدَادَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِيمَانًا ۙ وَلَا يَرْتَابَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ ۙ وَلِيَقُولَ الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ وَالْكَافِرُونَ مَاذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِهَٰذَا مَثَلًا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ جُنُودَ رَبِّكَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۚ وَمَا هِيَ إِلَّا ذِكْرَىٰ لِلْبَشَرِ

31  We have appointed only angels to be wardens of the Fire, and caused their number to be a stumbling block for those who disbelieve; so that those given the Scripture may attain certainty; and those who believe may increase in faith; and those given the Scripture and the believers may not doubt; and those in whose hearts is sickness and the unbelievers may say, "What did God intend by this parable?" Thus God leads astray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. None knows the soldiers of your Lord except He. This is nothing but a reminder for the mortals.

٣٢  كَلَّا وَالْقَمَرِ

32  Nay! By the moon.

٣٣  وَاللَّيْلِ إِذْ أَدْبَرَ

33  And the night as it retreats.

٣٤  وَالصُّبْحِ إِذَا أَسْفَرَ

34  And the morning as it lights up.

٣٥  إِنَّهَا لَإِحْدَى الْكُبَرِ

35  It is one of the greatest.

٣٦  نَذِيرًا لِلْبَشَرِ

36  A warning to the mortals.

٣٧  لِمَنْ شَاءَ مِنْكُمْ أَنْ يَتَقَدَّمَ أَوْ يَتَأَخَّرَ

37  To whomever among you wishes to advance, or regress.

٣٨  كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ

38  Every soul is hostage to what it has earned.

٣٩  إِلَّا أَصْحَابَ الْيَمِينِ

39  Except for those on the Right.

٤٠  فِي جَنَّاتٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

40  In Gardens, inquiring.

٤١  عَنِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ

41  About the guilty.

٤٢  مَا سَلَكَكُمْ فِي سَقَرَ

42  "What drove you into Saqar?"

٤٣  قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ

43  They will say, "We were not of those who prayed.

٤٤  وَلَمْ نَكُ نُطْعِمُ الْمِسْكِينَ

44  Nor did we feed the destitute.

٤٥  وَكُنَّا نَخُوضُ مَعَ الْخَائِضِينَ

45  And we used to indulge with those who indulge.

٤٦  وَكُنَّا نُكَذِّبُ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ

46  And we used to deny the Day of Judgment.

٤٧  حَتَّىٰ أَتَانَا الْيَقِينُ

47  Until the Inevitable came upon us."

٤٨  فَمَا تَنْفَعُهُمْ شَفَاعَةُ الشَّافِعِينَ

48  But the intercession of intercessors will not help them.

٤٩  فَمَا لَهُمْ عَنِ التَّذْكِرَةِ مُعْرِضِينَ

49  Why are they turning away from the Reminder?

٥٠  كَأَنَّهُمْ حُمُرٌ مُسْتَنْفِرَةٌ

50  As though they were panicked donkeys.

٥١  فَرَّتْ مِنْ قَسْوَرَةٍ

51  Fleeing from a lion?

٥٢  بَلْ يُرِيدُ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ يُؤْتَىٰ صُحُفًا مُنَشَّرَةً

52  Yet every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled.

٥٣  كَلَّا ۖ بَلْ لَا يَخَافُونَ الْآخِرَةَ

53  No indeed! But they do not fear the Hereafter.

٥٤  كَلَّا إِنَّهُ تَذْكِرَةٌ

54  Nevertheless, it is a reminder.

٥٥  فَمَنْ شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ

55  So whoever wills, shall remember it.

٥٦  وَمَا يَذْكُرُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ هُوَ أَهْلُ التَّقْوَىٰ وَأَهْلُ الْمَغْفِرَةِ

56  But they will not remember, unless God wills. He is the Source of Righteousness, and the Source of Forgiveness.