
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَيْلٌ لِلْمُطَفِّفِينَ

1  Woe to the defrauders.

٢  الَّذِينَ إِذَا اكْتَالُوا عَلَى النَّاسِ يَسْتَوْفُونَ

2  Those who, when they take a measure from people, they take in full.

٣  وَإِذَا كَالُوهُمْ أَوْ وَزَنُوهُمْ يُخْسِرُونَ

3  But when they measure or weigh to others, they cheat.

٤  أَلَا يَظُنُّ أُولَٰئِكَ أَنَّهُمْ مَبْعُوثُونَ

4  Do these not know that they will be resurrected?

٥  لِيَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ

5  For a Great Day?

٦  يَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

6  The Day when mankind will stand before the Lord of the Worlds?

٧  كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْفُجَّارِ لَفِي سِجِّينٍ

7  Not at all. The record of the wicked is in Sijjeen.

٨  وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سِجِّينٌ

8  But how can you know what Sijjeen is?

٩  كِتَابٌ مَرْقُومٌ

9  A numerical book.

١٠  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

10  Woe on that Day to the deniers.

١١  الَّذِينَ يُكَذِّبُونَ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ

11  Those who deny the Day of Reckoning.

١٢  وَمَا يُكَذِّبُ بِهِ إِلَّا كُلُّ مُعْتَدٍ أَثِيمٍ

12  But none denies it except the sinful aggressor.

١٣  إِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ آيَاتُنَا قَالَ أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

13  When Our revelations are recited to him, he says, "Legends of the ancients."

١٤  كَلَّا ۖ بَلْ ۜ رَانَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ

14  Not at all. Their hearts have become corroded by what they used to earn.

١٥  كَلَّا إِنَّهُمْ عَنْ رَبِّهِمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَمَحْجُوبُونَ

15  Not at all. On that Day, they will be screened from their Lord.

١٦  ثُمَّ إِنَّهُمْ لَصَالُو الْجَحِيمِ

16  Then they will roast in Hell.

١٧  ثُمَّ يُقَالُ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ

17  Then it will be said, "This is what you used to deny."

١٨  كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ

18  No indeed; the record of the righteous is in Elliyyeen.

١٩  وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا عِلِّيُّونَ

19  But how can you know what Elliyyoon is?

٢٠  كِتَابٌ مَرْقُومٌ

20  A numerical book.

٢١  يَشْهَدُهُ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ

21  Witnessed by those brought near.

٢٢  إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ

22  Indeed, the righteous will be amid bliss.

٢٣  عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنْظُرُونَ

23  On thrones, looking on.

٢٤  تَعْرِفُ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ نَضْرَةَ النَّعِيمِ

24  You will recognize on their faces the radiance of bliss.

٢٥  يُسْقَوْنَ مِنْ رَحِيقٍ مَخْتُومٍ

25  They will be given to drink a sealed wine.

٢٦  خِتَامُهُ مِسْكٌ ۚ وَفِي ذَٰلِكَ فَلْيَتَنَافَسِ الْمُتَنَافِسُونَ

26  Whose seal is musk-this is what competitors should compete for.

٢٧  وَمِزَاجُهُ مِنْ تَسْنِيمٍ

27  Its mixture is of Tasneem.

٢٨  عَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا الْمُقَرَّبُونَ

28  A spring from which those brought near drink.

٢٩  إِنَّ الَّذِينَ أَجْرَمُوا كَانُوا مِنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يَضْحَكُونَ

29  Those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed.

٣٠  وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِهِمْ يَتَغَامَزُونَ

30  And when they passed by them, they would wink at one another.

٣١  وَإِذَا انْقَلَبُوا إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِمُ انْقَلَبُوا فَكِهِينَ

31  And when they went back to their families, they would go back exulting.

٣٢  وَإِذَا رَأَوْهُمْ قَالُوا إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَضَالُّونَ

32  And if they saw them, they would say, "These people are lost."

٣٣  وَمَا أُرْسِلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ حَافِظِينَ

33  Yet they were not sent as guardians over them.

٣٤  فَالْيَوْمَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنَ الْكُفَّارِ يَضْحَكُونَ

34  But on that Day, those who believed will laugh at the unbelievers.

٣٥  عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنْظُرُونَ

35  On luxurious furnishings, looking on.

٣٦  هَلْ ثُوِّبَ الْكُفَّارُ مَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ

36  Have the unbelievers been repaid for what they used to do?