
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالْمُرْسَلَاتِ عُرْفًا

1  By those unleashed in succession.

٢  فَالْعَاصِفَاتِ عَصْفًا

2  Storming turbulently.

٣  وَالنَّاشِرَاتِ نَشْرًا

3  Scattering far and wide.

٤  فَالْفَارِقَاتِ فَرْقًا

4  Separating decisively.

٥  فَالْمُلْقِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا

5  Delivering a message.

٦  عُذْرًا أَوْ نُذْرًا

6  Excusing or warning.

٧  إِنَّمَا تُوعَدُونَ لَوَاقِعٌ

7  Surely what you are promised will happen.

٨  فَإِذَا النُّجُومُ طُمِسَتْ

8  When the stars are obliterated.

٩  وَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ فُرِجَتْ

9  And the sky is fractured.

١٠  وَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ نُسِفَتْ

10  And the mountains are blown away.

١١  وَإِذَا الرُّسُلُ أُقِّتَتْ

11  And the messengers are alerted.

١٢  لِأَيِّ يَوْمٍ أُجِّلَتْ

12  Until which day is it deferred?

١٣  لِيَوْمِ الْفَصْلِ

13  Until the Day of Decision.

١٤  وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ

14  And what will teach you what the Day of Decision is?

١٥  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

15  Woe on that Day to the liars.

١٦  أَلَمْ نُهْلِكِ الْأَوَّلِينَ

16  Did We not destroy the ancients?

١٧  ثُمَّ نُتْبِعُهُمُ الْآخِرِينَ

17  Then succeeded them with the others?

١٨  كَذَٰلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِالْمُجْرِمِينَ

18  This is how We deal with the guilty.

١٩  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

19  Woe on that Day to the rejecters.

٢٠  أَلَمْ نَخْلُقْكُمْ مِنْ مَاءٍ مَهِينٍ

20  Did We not create you from an insignificant fluid?

٢١  فَجَعَلْنَاهُ فِي قَرَارٍ مَكِينٍ

21  Then lodged it in a secure place?

٢٢  إِلَىٰ قَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ

22  For a known term?

٢٣  فَقَدَرْنَا فَنِعْمَ الْقَادِرُونَ

23  We measured precisely. We are the best to measure.

٢٤  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

24  Woe on that Day to the falsifiers.

٢٥  أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ كِفَاتًا

25  Did We not make the earth a homestead?

٢٦  أَحْيَاءً وَأَمْوَاتًا

26  For the living and the dead?

٢٧  وَجَعَلْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ شَامِخَاتٍ وَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمْ مَاءً فُرَاتًا

27  And set on it lofty mountains, and given you pure water to drink?

٢٨  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

28  Woe on that Day to the deniers.

٢٩  انْطَلِقُوا إِلَىٰ مَا كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ

29  "Proceed to what you used to deny."

٣٠  انْطَلِقُوا إِلَىٰ ظِلٍّ ذِي ثَلَاثِ شُعَبٍ

30  "Proceed to a shadow of three different masses."

٣١  لَا ظَلِيلٍ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِنَ اللَّهَبِ

31  Offering no shade, and unavailing against the flames.

٣٢  إِنَّهَا تَرْمِي بِشَرَرٍ كَالْقَصْرِ

32  It shoots sparks as castles.

٣٣  كَأَنَّهُ جِمَالَتٌ صُفْرٌ

33  As if they were yellow camels.

٣٤  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

34  Woe on that Day to the liars.

٣٥  هَٰذَا يَوْمُ لَا يَنْطِقُونَ

35  This is a Day when they will not speak.

٣٦  وَلَا يُؤْذَنُ لَهُمْ فَيَعْتَذِرُونَ

36  And they will not be allowed to apologize.

٣٧  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

37  Woe on that Day to the rejecters.

٣٨  هَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ ۖ جَمَعْنَاكُمْ وَالْأَوَّلِينَ

38  This is the Day of Separation; We have gathered you, together with the ancients.

٣٩  فَإِنْ كَانَ لَكُمْ كَيْدٌ فَكِيدُونِ

39  So if you have a strategy, use it against Me.

٤٠  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

40  Woe on that Day to the falsifiers.

٤١  إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي ظِلَالٍ وَعُيُونٍ

41  The righteous will be amidst shades and fountains.

٤٢  وَفَوَاكِهَ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ

42  And fruits as they desire.

٤٣  كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ

43  "Eat and drink pleasantly, for what you used to do."

٤٤  إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ

44  This is how We reward the doers of good.

٤٥  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

45  Woe on that Day to the deniers.

٤٦  كُلُوا وَتَمَتَّعُوا قَلِيلًا إِنَّكُمْ مُجْرِمُونَ

46  "Eat and enjoy yourselves a little; you are indeed criminals."

٤٧  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

47  Woe on that Day to the liars.

٤٨  وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ ارْكَعُوا لَا يَرْكَعُونَ

48  And when it is said to them, "Kneel", they do not kneel.

٤٩  وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

49  Woe on that Day to the rejecters.

٥٠  فَبِأَيِّ حَدِيثٍ بَعْدَهُ يُؤْمِنُونَ

50  In what message, beyond this, will they believe?