
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  سَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ

1  A questioner questioned the imminent torment.

٢  لِلْكَافِرِينَ لَيْسَ لَهُ دَافِعٌ

2  For the disbelievers; none can repel it.

٣  مِنَ اللَّهِ ذِي الْمَعَارِجِ

3  From God, Lord of the Ways of Ascent.

٤  تَعْرُجُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ إِلَيْهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ

4  Unto Him the angels and the Spirit ascend on a Day the duration of which is fifty thousand years.

٥  فَاصْبِرْ صَبْرًا جَمِيلًا

5  So be patient, with sweet patience.

٦  إِنَّهُمْ يَرَوْنَهُ بَعِيدًا

6  They see it distant.

٧  وَنَرَاهُ قَرِيبًا

7  But We see it near.

٨  يَوْمَ تَكُونُ السَّمَاءُ كَالْمُهْلِ

8  On the Day when the sky will be like molten brass.

٩  وَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ

9  And the mountains will be like tufted wool.

١٠  وَلَا يَسْأَلُ حَمِيمٌ حَمِيمًا

10  No friend will care about his friend.

١١  يُبَصَّرُونَهُمْ ۚ يَوَدُّ الْمُجْرِمُ لَوْ يَفْتَدِي مِنْ عَذَابِ يَوْمِئِذٍ بِبَنِيهِ

11  They will be shown each other. The criminal wishes he would be redeemed from the punishment of that Day by his children.

١٢  وَصَاحِبَتِهِ وَأَخِيهِ

12  And his spouse, and his brother.

١٣  وَفَصِيلَتِهِ الَّتِي تُؤْوِيهِ

13  And his family that sheltered him.

١٤  وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ يُنْجِيهِ

14  And everyone on earth, in order to save him.

١٥  كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّهَا لَظَىٰ

15   By no means! It is a Raging Fire.

١٦  نَزَّاعَةً لِلشَّوَىٰ

16  It strips away the scalps.

١٧  تَدْعُو مَنْ أَدْبَرَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ

17  It invites him who once turned his back and fled.

١٨  وَجَمَعَ فَأَوْعَىٰ

18  And accumulated and hoarded.

١٩  إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ خُلِقَ هَلُوعًا

19  Man was created restless.

٢٠  إِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ جَزُوعًا

20  Touched by adversity, he is fretful.

٢١  وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الْخَيْرُ مَنُوعًا

21  Touched by good, he is ungenerous.

٢٢  إِلَّا الْمُصَلِّينَ

22  Except the prayerful.

٢٣  الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَىٰ صَلَاتِهِمْ دَائِمُونَ

23  Those who are constant at their prayers.

٢٤  وَالَّذِينَ فِي أَمْوَالِهِمْ حَقٌّ مَعْلُومٌ

24  And those in whose wealth is a rightful share.

٢٥  لِلسَّائِلِ وَالْمَحْرُومِ

25  For the beggar and the deprived.

٢٦  وَالَّذِينَ يُصَدِّقُونَ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ

26  And those who affirm the Day of Judgment.

٢٧  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ مِنْ عَذَابِ رَبِّهِمْ مُشْفِقُونَ

27  And those who fear the punishment of their Lord.

٢٨  إِنَّ عَذَابَ رَبِّهِمْ غَيْرُ مَأْمُونٍ

28  Their Lord's punishment is not to be taken for granted.

٢٩  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ حَافِظُونَ

29  And those who guard their chastity.

٣٠  إِلَّا عَلَىٰ أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ

30  Except from their spouses or those living under their control, for then they are free of blame.

٣١  فَمَنِ ابْتَغَىٰ وَرَاءَ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ

31  But whoever seeks to go beyond that-these are the transgressors.

٣٢  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ

32  And those who honor their trusts and their pledges.

٣٣  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِشَهَادَاتِهِمْ قَائِمُونَ

33  And those who stand by their testimonies.

٣٤  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَىٰ صَلَاتِهِمْ يُحَافِظُونَ

34  And those who are dedicated to their prayers.

٣٥  أُولَٰئِكَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ مُكْرَمُونَ

35  These will be honored in Gardens.

٣٦  فَمَالِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا قِبَلَكَ مُهْطِعِينَ

36  What is with those who disbelieve, stretching their necks towards you.

٣٧  عَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ عِزِينَ

37  From the right, and from the left, banding together?

٣٨  أَيَطْمَعُ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ يُدْخَلَ جَنَّةَ نَعِيمٍ

38  Is every one of them aspiring to be admitted into a Garden of Bliss?

٣٩  كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُمْ مِمَّا يَعْلَمُونَ

39  No indeed! We created them from what they know.

٤٠  فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِرَبِّ الْمَشَارِقِ وَالْمَغَارِبِ إِنَّا لَقَادِرُونَ

40  I swear by the Lord of the Easts and the Wests, that We are Able.

٤١  عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُبَدِّلَ خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَسْبُوقِينَ

41  To replace them with better than they, and We are not to be outdone.

٤٢  فَذَرْهُمْ يَخُوضُوا وَيَلْعَبُوا حَتَّىٰ يُلَاقُوا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي يُوعَدُونَ

42  So leave them to blunder and play, until they meet their Day which they are promised.

٤٣  يَوْمَ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ سِرَاعًا كَأَنَّهُمْ إِلَىٰ نُصُبٍ يُوفِضُونَ

43  The Day when they will emerge from the tombs in a rush, as though they were hurrying towards a target.

٤٤  خَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ تَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ

44  Their eyes cast down; overwhelmed by humiliation. This is the Day which they were promised.