
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ

1  O you Enwrapped one.

٢  قُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا

2  Stay up the night, except a little.

٣  نِصْفَهُ أَوِ انْقُصْ مِنْهُ قَلِيلًا

3  For half of it, or reduce it a little.

٤  أَوْ زِدْ عَلَيْهِ وَرَتِّلِ الْقُرْآنَ تَرْتِيلًا

4  Or add to it; and chant the Quran rhythmically.

٥  إِنَّا سَنُلْقِي عَلَيْكَ قَوْلًا ثَقِيلًا

5  We are about to give you a heavy message.

٦  إِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْئًا وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلًا

6  The vigil of night is more effective, and better suited for recitation.

٧  إِنَّ لَكَ فِي النَّهَارِ سَبْحًا طَوِيلًا

7  In the daytime, you have lengthy work to do.

٨  وَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ وَتَبَتَّلْ إِلَيْهِ تَبْتِيلًا

8  So remember the Name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly.

٩  رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَاتَّخِذْهُ وَكِيلًا

9  Lord of the East and the West. There is no god but He, so take Him as a Trustee.

١٠  وَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَاهْجُرْهُمْ هَجْرًا جَمِيلًا

10  And endure patiently what they say, and withdraw from them politely.

١١  وَذَرْنِي وَالْمُكَذِّبِينَ أُولِي النَّعْمَةِ وَمَهِّلْهُمْ قَلِيلًا

11  And leave Me to those who deny the truth, those of luxury, and give them a brief respite.

١٢  إِنَّ لَدَيْنَا أَنْكَالًا وَجَحِيمًا

12  With Us are shackles, and a Fierce Fire.

١٣  وَطَعَامًا ذَا غُصَّةٍ وَعَذَابًا أَلِيمًا

13  And food that chokes, and a painful punishment.

١٤  يَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ وَكَانَتِ الْجِبَالُ كَثِيبًا مَهِيلًا

14  On the Day when the earth and the mountains tremble, and the mountains become heaps of sand.

١٥  إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ رَسُولًا شَاهِدًا عَلَيْكُمْ كَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ رَسُولًا

15  We have sent to you a messenger, a witness over you, as We sent to Pharaoh a messenger.

١٦  فَعَصَىٰ فِرْعَوْنُ الرَّسُولَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُ أَخْذًا وَبِيلًا

16  But Pharaoh defied the Messenger, so We seized him with a terrible seizing.

١٧  فَكَيْفَ تَتَّقُونَ إِنْ كَفَرْتُمْ يَوْمًا يَجْعَلُ الْوِلْدَانَ شِيبًا

17  So how will you, if you persist in unbelief, save yourself from a Day which will turn the children gray-haired?

١٨  السَّمَاءُ مُنْفَطِرٌ بِهِ ۚ كَانَ وَعْدُهُ مَفْعُولًا

18  The heaven will shatter thereby. His promise is always fulfilled.

١٩  إِنَّ هَٰذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ ۖ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ سَبِيلًا

19  This is a reminder. So whoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord.

٢٠  إِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ تَقُومُ أَدْنَىٰ مِنْ ثُلُثَيِ اللَّيْلِ وَنِصْفَهُ وَثُلُثَهُ وَطَائِفَةٌ مِنَ الَّذِينَ مَعَكَ ۚ وَاللَّهُ يُقَدِّرُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ ۚ عَلِمَ أَنْ لَنْ تُحْصُوهُ فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ فَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ ۚ عَلِمَ أَنْ سَيَكُونُ مِنْكُمْ مَرْضَىٰ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ يَضْرِبُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَبْتَغُونَ مِنْ فَضْلِ اللَّهِ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۖ فَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنْهُ ۚ وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَقْرِضُوا اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا ۚ وَمَا تُقَدِّمُوا لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ هُوَ خَيْرًا وَأَعْظَمَ أَجْرًا ۚ وَاسْتَغْفِرُوا اللَّهَ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ

20  Your Lord knows that you stay up nearly two-thirds of the night, or half of it, or one-third of it, along with a group of those with you. God designed the night and the day. He knows that you are unable to sustain it, so He has pardoned you. So read of the Quran what is possible for you. He knows that some of you may be ill; and others travelling through the land, seeking God's bounty; and others fighting in God's cause. So read of it what is possible for you, and observe the prayers, and give regular charity, and lend God a generous loan. Whatever good you advance for yourselves, you will find it with God, better and generously rewarded. And seek God's forgiveness, for God is Forgiving and Merciful.