
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ

1  Successful are the believers.

٢  الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلَاتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ

2  Those who are humble in their prayers.

٣  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنِ اللَّغْوِ مُعْرِضُونَ

3  Those who avoid nonsense.

٤  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِلزَّكَاةِ فَاعِلُونَ

4  Those who work for charity.

٥  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ حَافِظُونَ

5  Those who safeguard their chastity.

٦  إِلَّا عَلَىٰ أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ

6  Except from their spouses, or their dependents-for they are free from blame.

٧  فَمَنِ ابْتَغَىٰ وَرَاءَ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ

7  But whoever seeks anything beyond that-these are the transgressors.

٨  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ

8  Those who are faithful to their trusts and pledges.

٩  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَىٰ صَلَوَاتِهِمْ يُحَافِظُونَ

9  Those who safeguard their prayers.

١٠  أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْوَارِثُونَ

10  These are the inheritors.

١١  الَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الْفِرْدَوْسَ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ

11  Who will inherit Paradise, wherein they will dwell forever.

١٢  وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ سُلَالَةٍ مِنْ طِينٍ

12  We created man from an extract of clay.

١٣  ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاهُ نُطْفَةً فِي قَرَارٍ مَكِينٍ

13  Then We made him a seed, in a secure repository.

١٤  ثُمَّ خَلَقْنَا النُّطْفَةَ عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْعَلَقَةَ مُضْغَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْمُضْغَةَ عِظَامًا فَكَسَوْنَا الْعِظَامَ لَحْمًا ثُمَّ أَنْشَأْنَاهُ خَلْقًا آخَرَ ۚ فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ

14  Then We developed the seed into a clot. Then We developed the clot into a lump. Then We developed the lump into bones. Then We clothed the bones with flesh. Then We produced it into another creature. Most Blessed is God, the Best of Creators.

١٥  ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ لَمَيِّتُونَ

15  Then, after that, you will die.

١٦  ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تُبْعَثُونَ

16  Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be resurrected.

١٧  وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعَ طَرَائِقَ وَمَا كُنَّا عَنِ الْخَلْقِ غَافِلِينَ

17  We created above you seven pathways, and We are never heedless of the creation.

١٨  وَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً بِقَدَرٍ فَأَسْكَنَّاهُ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ ذَهَابٍ بِهِ لَقَادِرُونَ

18  And We sent down water from the sky in proper quantity, and settled it in the ground, and We are Able to take it away.

١٩  فَأَنْشَأْنَا لَكُمْ بِهِ جَنَّاتٍ مِنْ نَخِيلٍ وَأَعْنَابٍ لَكُمْ فِيهَا فَوَاكِهُ كَثِيرَةٌ وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ

19  With it We produce for you gardens of palms and vines, yielding abundant fruit for you to eat.

٢٠  وَشَجَرَةً تَخْرُجُ مِنْ طُورِ سَيْنَاءَ تَنْبُتُ بِالدُّهْنِ وَصِبْغٍ لِلْآكِلِينَ

20  And a tree springing out of Mount Sinai, producing oil, and seasoning for those who eat.

٢١  وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِي الْأَنْعَامِ لَعِبْرَةً ۖ نُسْقِيكُمْ مِمَّا فِي بُطُونِهَا وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ كَثِيرَةٌ وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ

21  And there is a lesson for you in livestock: We give you to drink from what is in their bellies, and you have many benefits in them, and from them you eat.

٢٢  وَعَلَيْهَا وَعَلَى الْفُلْكِ تُحْمَلُونَ

22  And on them, and on the ships, you are transported.

٢٣  وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ فَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ ۖ أَفَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

23  We sent Noah to his people. He said, "O my people, worship God, you have no deity other than Him. Will you not take heed?"

٢٤  فَقَالَ الْمَلَأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ قَوْمِهِ مَا هَٰذَا إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَتَفَضَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَأَنْزَلَ مَلَائِكَةً مَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَٰذَا فِي آبَائِنَا الْأَوَّلِينَ

24  But the notables of his people, who disbelieved, said, "This is nothing but a human like you, who wants to gain superiority over you. Had God willed, He would have sent down angels. We never heard of this from our forefathers of old.

٢٥  إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا رَجُلٌ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ فَتَرَبَّصُوا بِهِ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ

25  He is nothing but a man possessed. Just ignore him for a while."

٢٦  قَالَ رَبِّ انْصُرْنِي بِمَا كَذَّبُونِ

26  He said, "My Lord, help me, for they have rejected me."

٢٧  فَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ أَنِ اصْنَعِ الْفُلْكَ بِأَعْيُنِنَا وَوَحْيِنَا فَإِذَا جَاءَ أَمْرُنَا وَفَارَ التَّنُّورُ ۙ فَاسْلُكْ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلٍّ زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ وَأَهْلَكَ إِلَّا مَنْ سَبَقَ عَلَيْهِ الْقَوْلُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَلَا تُخَاطِبْنِي فِي الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا ۖ إِنَّهُمْ مُغْرَقُونَ

27  So We inspired him: "Build the Ark under Our observation and by Our inspiration. And when Our decree comes to pass, and the oven boils over, load into it two pairs of every kind, together with your family, except those of them against whom the word has already been pronounced. And do not speak to me concerning those who did wrong; for they are to be drowned."

٢٨  فَإِذَا اسْتَوَيْتَ أَنْتَ وَمَنْ مَعَكَ عَلَى الْفُلْكِ فَقُلِ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي نَجَّانَا مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ

28  Then, when you and those with you are settled in the Ark, say, "Praise be to God, who has saved us from the wrongdoing people."

٢٩  وَقُلْ رَبِّ أَنْزِلْنِي مُنْزَلًا مُبَارَكًا وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الْمُنْزِلِينَ

29  And say, "My Lord, land me with a blessed landing, as you are the best of transporters."

٣٠  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ وَإِنْ كُنَّا لَمُبْتَلِينَ

30  Surely in that are signs. We are always testing.

٣١  ثُمَّ أَنْشَأْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ قَرْنًا آخَرِينَ

31  Then, after them, We established another generation.

٣٢  فَأَرْسَلْنَا فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا مِنْهُمْ أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ ۖ أَفَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

32  And We sent among them a messenger from themselves: "Serve God. You have no god other than Him. Will you not be cautious?"

٣٣  وَقَالَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْ قَوْمِهِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِلِقَاءِ الْآخِرَةِ وَأَتْرَفْنَاهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا مَا هَٰذَا إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ يَأْكُلُ مِمَّا تَأْكُلُونَ مِنْهُ وَيَشْرَبُ مِمَّا تَشْرَبُونَ

33  But the dignitaries of his people, those who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the Hereafter, and We had indulged them in the present life, said, "This is nothing but a human like you; he eats what you eat, and he drinks what you drink.

٣٤  وَلَئِنْ أَطَعْتُمْ بَشَرًا مِثْلَكُمْ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا لَخَاسِرُونَ

34  If you obey a human being like yourselves, then you will be losers.

٣٥  أَيَعِدُكُمْ أَنَّكُمْ إِذَا مِتُّمْ وَكُنْتُمْ تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَنَّكُمْ مُخْرَجُونَ

35  Does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones, you will be brought out?

٣٦  هَيْهَاتَ هَيْهَاتَ لِمَا تُوعَدُونَ

36  Farfetched, farfetched is what you are promised.

٣٧  إِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَبْعُوثِينَ

37  There is nothing but our life in this world. We die, and we live, and we are not resurrected.

٣٨  إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا رَجُلٌ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا وَمَا نَحْنُ لَهُ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ

38  He is nothing but a man, making up lies about God. We have no faith in him."

٣٩  قَالَ رَبِّ انْصُرْنِي بِمَا كَذَّبُونِ

39  He said, "My Lord, help me, for they have rejected me."

٤٠  قَالَ عَمَّا قَلِيلٍ لَيُصْبِحُنَّ نَادِمِينَ

40  He said, "Soon they will be filled with regret."

٤١  فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ بِالْحَقِّ فَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ غُثَاءً ۚ فَبُعْدًا لِلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ

41  Then the Blast struck them, justifiably, and We turned them into scum. So away with the wicked people.

٤٢  ثُمَّ أَنْشَأْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ قُرُونًا آخَرِينَ

42  Then, after them, We raised other generations.

٤٣  مَا تَسْبِقُ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ أَجَلَهَا وَمَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ

43  No nation can advance its time, nor can they postpone it.

٤٤  ثُمَّ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا تَتْرَىٰ ۖ كُلَّ مَا جَاءَ أُمَّةً رَسُولُهَا كَذَّبُوهُ ۚ فَأَتْبَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ بَعْضًا وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَحَادِيثَ ۚ فَبُعْدًا لِقَوْمٍ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ

44  Then We sent Our messengers in succession. Every time a messenger came to his community, they called him a liar. So We made them follow one another, and made them history. So away with a people who do not believe.

٤٥  ثُمَّ أَرْسَلْنَا مُوسَىٰ وَأَخَاهُ هَارُونَ بِآيَاتِنَا وَسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ

45  Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our signs and a clear authority.

٤٦  إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَئِهِ فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَكَانُوا قَوْمًا عَالِينَ

46  To Pharaoh and his nobles, but they turned arrogant. They were oppressive people.

٤٧  فَقَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لِبَشَرَيْنِ مِثْلِنَا وَقَوْمُهُمَا لَنَا عَابِدُونَ

47  They said, "Are we to believe in two mortals like us, and their people are our slaves?"

٤٨  فَكَذَّبُوهُمَا فَكَانُوا مِنَ الْمُهْلَكِينَ

48  So they called them liars, and thus were among those destroyed.

٤٩  وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ

49  And We gave Moses the Scripture, that they may be guided.

٥٠  وَجَعَلْنَا ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ آيَةً وَآوَيْنَاهُمَا إِلَىٰ رَبْوَةٍ ذَاتِ قَرَارٍ وَمَعِينٍ

50  And We made Mary's son and his mother a sign, and We sheltered them on high ground with security and flowing springs.

٥١  يَا أَيُّهَا الرُّسُلُ كُلُوا مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَاعْمَلُوا صَالِحًا ۖ إِنِّي بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ

51  O messengers, eat of the good things, and act with integrity. I am aware of what you do.

٥٢  وَإِنَّ هَٰذِهِ أُمَّتُكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَأَنَا رَبُّكُمْ فَاتَّقُونِ

52  This nation of yours is one nation, and I am your Lord, so fear Me.

٥٣  فَتَقَطَّعُوا أَمْرَهُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ زُبُرًا ۖ كُلُّ حِزْبٍ بِمَا لَدَيْهِمْ فَرِحُونَ

53  But they tore themselves into sects; each party happy with what they have.

٥٤  فَذَرْهُمْ فِي غَمْرَتِهِمْ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ

54  So leave them in their bewilderment until a time.

٥٥  أَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّمَا نُمِدُّهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ مَالٍ وَبَنِينَ

55  Do they assume that, in furnishing them with wealth and children.

٥٦  نُسَارِعُ لَهُمْ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ ۚ بَلْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ

56  We race to give them the good things? In fact, they have no idea.

٥٧  إِنَّ الَّذِينَ هُمْ مِنْ خَشْيَةِ رَبِّهِمْ مُشْفِقُونَ

57  Those who, from awe of their Lord, are fearful.

٥٨  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ يُؤْمِنُونَ

58  And those who believe in their Lord's Verses.

٥٩  وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِرَبِّهِمْ لَا يُشْرِكُونَ

59  And those who associate no partners with their Lord.

٦٠  وَالَّذِينَ يُؤْتُونَ مَا آتَوْا وَقُلُوبُهُمْ وَجِلَةٌ أَنَّهُمْ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ رَاجِعُونَ

60  And those who give what they give, while their hearts quake, knowing that to their Lord they will return.

٦١  أُولَٰئِكَ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ وَهُمْ لَهَا سَابِقُونَ

61  It is they who race towards goodness. It is they who will reach it first.

٦٢  وَلَا نُكَلِّفُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا ۖ وَلَدَيْنَا كِتَابٌ يَنْطِقُ بِالْحَقِّ ۚ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ

62  We never burden any soul beyond its capacity. And with Us is a record that tells the truth, and they will not be wronged.

٦٣  بَلْ قُلُوبُهُمْ فِي غَمْرَةٍ مِنْ هَٰذَا وَلَهُمْ أَعْمَالٌ مِنْ دُونِ ذَٰلِكَ هُمْ لَهَا عَامِلُونَ

63  But their hearts are puzzled because of this; and they have deeds that do not conform to this, which they continue to perpetrate.

٦٤  حَتَّىٰ إِذَا أَخَذْنَا مُتْرَفِيهِمْ بِالْعَذَابِ إِذَا هُمْ يَجْأَرُونَ

64  Until, when We seize the decadent among them with torment, they begin to groan.

٦٥  لَا تَجْأَرُوا الْيَوْمَ ۖ إِنَّكُمْ مِنَّا لَا تُنْصَرُونَ

65  Do not groan today. You will receive no help from Us.

٦٦  قَدْ كَانَتْ آيَاتِي تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَكُنْتُمْ عَلَىٰ أَعْقَابِكُمْ تَنْكِصُونَ

66  My Verses were recited to you, but you turned back on your heels.

٦٧  مُسْتَكْبِرِينَ بِهِ سَامِرًا تَهْجُرُونَ

67  Arrogant towards it-talked nonsense about it-disregarded it.

٦٨  أَفَلَمْ يَدَّبَّرُوا الْقَوْلَ أَمْ جَاءَهُمْ مَا لَمْ يَأْتِ آبَاءَهُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

68  Have they not pondered the Word? Or has there come to them what came not to their forefathers of old?

٦٩  أَمْ لَمْ يَعْرِفُوا رَسُولَهُمْ فَهُمْ لَهُ مُنْكِرُونَ

69  Or is it that they did not recognize their messenger, so they are denying him?

٧٠  أَمْ يَقُولُونَ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ ۚ بَلْ جَاءَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ لِلْحَقِّ كَارِهُونَ

70  Or do they say, "He is possessed?" In fact, he brought them the truth, but most of them hate the truth.

٧١  وَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ ۚ بَلْ أَتَيْنَاهُمْ بِذِكْرِهِمْ فَهُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِهِمْ مُعْرِضُونَ

71  If the truth conformed to their desires, the heavens, the earth, and everyone in them would have gone to ruin. In fact, We have given them their message, but they keep avoiding their message.

٧٢  أَمْ تَسْأَلُهُمْ خَرْجًا فَخَرَاجُ رَبِّكَ خَيْرٌ ۖ وَهُوَ خَيْرُ الرَّازِقِينَ

72  Or are you asking them for a payment? The revenue from your Lord is better, and He is the Best of providers.

٧٣  وَإِنَّكَ لَتَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ

73  You are inviting them to a straight path.

٧٤  وَإِنَّ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ عَنِ الصِّرَاطِ لَنَاكِبُونَ

74  But those who do not believe in the Hereafter are swerving from the path.

٧٥  وَلَوْ رَحِمْنَاهُمْ وَكَشَفْنَا مَا بِهِمْ مِنْ ضُرٍّ لَلَجُّوا فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ

75  Even if We had mercy on them, and relieved their problems, they would still blindly persist in their defiance.

٧٦  وَلَقَدْ أَخَذْنَاهُمْ بِالْعَذَابِ فَمَا اسْتَكَانُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ وَمَا يَتَضَرَّعُونَ

76  We have already gripped them with suffering, but they did not surrender to their Lord, nor did they humble themselves.

٧٧  حَتَّىٰ إِذَا فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ بَابًا ذَا عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ إِذَا هُمْ فِيهِ مُبْلِسُونَ

77  Until, when We have opened before them a gate of intense agony, at once they will despair.

٧٨  وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَنْشَأَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَشْكُرُونَ

78  It is He who produced for you the hearing, and the eyesight, and the feelings. But little gratitude you show.

٧٩  وَهُوَ الَّذِي ذَرَأَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَإِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ

79  And it is He who multiplied you on earth, and to Him you will be gathered.

٨٠  وَهُوَ الَّذِي يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ وَلَهُ اخْتِلَافُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ ۚ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ

80  And it is He who gives life and brings death, and to Him is the alternation of night and day. Do you not understand?

٨١  بَلْ قَالُوا مِثْلَ مَا قَالَ الْأَوَّلُونَ

81  But they say the like of what the ancients said.

٨٢  قَالُوا أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ

82  They say, "After we have died, and become dust and bones, will we be resurrected?

٨٣  لَقَدْ وُعِدْنَا نَحْنُ وَآبَاؤُنَا هَٰذَا مِنْ قَبْلُ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

83  We were promised this before-we and our ancestors-these are nothing but legends of the ancients."

٨٤  قُلْ لِمَنِ الْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ

84  Say, "To whom does the earth belong, and everyone in it, if you happen to know?"

٨٥  سَيَقُولُونَ لِلَّهِ ۚ قُلْ أَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ

85  They will say, "To God." Say, "Will you not reflect?"

٨٦  قُلْ مَنْ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ السَّبْعِ وَرَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ

86  Say, "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and Lord of the Splendid Throne?"

٨٧  سَيَقُولُونَ لِلَّهِ ۚ قُلْ أَفَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

87  They will say, "To God." Say, "Will you not become righteous?"

٨٨  قُلْ مَنْ بِيَدِهِ مَلَكُوتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ يُجِيرُ وَلَا يُجَارُ عَلَيْهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ

88  Say, "In whose hand is the dominion of all things, and He protects and cannot be protected from, if you happen to know?"

٨٩  سَيَقُولُونَ لِلَّهِ ۚ قُلْ فَأَنَّىٰ تُسْحَرُونَ

89  They will say, "To God." Say, "Then are you bewitched?"

٩٠  بَلْ أَتَيْنَاهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ

90  In fact, We have given them the truth, and they are liars.

٩١  مَا اتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ مِنْ وَلَدٍ وَمَا كَانَ مَعَهُ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ ۚ إِذًا لَذَهَبَ كُلُّ إِلَٰهٍ بِمَا خَلَقَ وَلَعَلَا بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ۚ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ

91  God has never begotten a son, nor is there any god besides Him. Otherwise, each god would have taken away what it has created, and some of them would have gained supremacy over others. Glory be to God, far beyond what they describe.

٩٢  عَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ فَتَعَالَىٰ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ

92  The Knower of the hidden and the manifest. He is exalted, far above what they associate.

٩٣  قُلْ رَبِّ إِمَّا تُرِيَنِّي مَا يُوعَدُونَ

93  Say, "My Lord, if You would show me what they are promised.

٩٤  رَبِّ فَلَا تَجْعَلْنِي فِي الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ

94  My Lord, do not place me among the wicked people."

٩٥  وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُرِيَكَ مَا نَعِدُهُمْ لَقَادِرُونَ

95  We are surely Able to show you what We promise them.

٩٦  ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ السَّيِّئَةَ ۚ نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَصِفُونَ

96  Repel evil by what is better. We are aware of what they describe.

٩٧  وَقُلْ رَبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ

97  And say, "My Lord, I seek refuge with You from the urgings of the devils.

٩٨  وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ رَبِّ أَنْ يَحْضُرُونِ

98  And I seek refuge with You, my Lord, lest they become present."

٩٩  حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَهُمُ الْمَوْتُ قَالَ رَبِّ ارْجِعُونِ

99  Until, when death comes to one of them, he says, "My Lord, send me back.

١٠٠  لَعَلِّي أَعْمَلُ صَالِحًا فِيمَا تَرَكْتُ ۚ كَلَّا ۚ إِنَّهَا كَلِمَةٌ هُوَ قَائِلُهَا ۖ وَمِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ بَرْزَخٌ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ

100  That I may do right in what I have neglected." By no means! It is just a word that he utters. And behind them is a barrier, until the Day they are resurrected.

١٠١  فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَلَا أَنْسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلَا يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

101  When the Horn is blown, no relations between them will exist on that Day, and they will not ask after one another.

١٠٢  فَمَنْ ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ

102  Those whose scales are heavy-those are the successful.

١٠٣  وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ فِي جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدُونَ

103  But those whose scales are light-those are they who have lost their souls; in Hell they will dwell forever.

١٠٤  تَلْفَحُ وُجُوهَهُمُ النَّارُ وَهُمْ فِيهَا كَالِحُونَ

104  The Fire lashes their faces, and therein they grimace.

١٠٥  أَلَمْ تَكُنْ آيَاتِي تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَكُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ

105  "Were not My revelations recited to you, and you kept on rejecting them?"

١٠٦  قَالُوا رَبَّنَا غَلَبَتْ عَلَيْنَا شِقْوَتُنَا وَكُنَّا قَوْمًا ضَالِّينَ

106  They will say, "Our Lord, our wretchedness prevailed over us, and we were a people astray.

١٠٧  رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا مِنْهَا فَإِنْ عُدْنَا فَإِنَّا ظَالِمُونَ

107  Our Lord! Bring us out of this. If we ever returned, we would truly be evil."

١٠٨  قَالَ اخْسَئُوا فِيهَا وَلَا تُكَلِّمُونِ

108  He will say, "Be despised therein, and do not speak to Me.

١٠٩  إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَرِيقٌ مِنْ عِبَادِي يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الرَّاحِمِينَ

109  There was a group of My servants who would say, `Our Lord, we have believed, so forgive us, and have mercy on us; You are the Best of the merciful.'

١١٠  فَاتَّخَذْتُمُوهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا حَتَّىٰ أَنْسَوْكُمْ ذِكْرِي وَكُنْتُمْ مِنْهُمْ تَضْحَكُونَ

110  But you made them a target of ridicule, until they made you forget My remembrance; and you used to laugh at them.

١١١  إِنِّي جَزَيْتُهُمُ الْيَوْمَ بِمَا صَبَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ

111  Today, I have rewarded them for their endurance. They are the ones who are the triumphant."

١١٢  قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ عَدَدَ سِنِينَ

112  He will say, "How many years did you remain on earth?"

١١٣  قَالُوا لَبِثْنَا يَوْمًا أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ فَاسْأَلِ الْعَادِّينَ

113  They will say, "We remained a day, or part of a day; but ask those who keep count."

١١٤  قَالَ إِنْ لَبِثْتُمْ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا ۖ لَوْ أَنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ

114  He will say, "You remained only for a little while, if you only knew.

١١٥  أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا لَا تُرْجَعُونَ

115  Did you think that We created you in vain, and that to Us you will not be returned?"

١١٦  فَتَعَالَى اللَّهُ الْمَلِكُ الْحَقُّ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْكَرِيمِ

116  So Exalted is God, the Ruler, the Real. There is no god except He, the Lord of the Noble Throne.

١١٧  وَمَنْ يَدْعُ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ لَا بُرْهَانَ لَهُ بِهِ فَإِنَّمَا حِسَابُهُ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِ ۚ إِنَّهُ لَا يُفْلِحُ الْكَافِرُونَ

117  Whoever invokes another god besides God-he has no proof thereof-his reckoning rests with his Lord. The disbelievers will not succeed.

١١٨  وَقُلْ رَبِّ اغْفِرْ وَارْحَمْ وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الرَّاحِمِينَ

118  And say, "My Lord, forgive and have mercy, for You are the Best of the merciful."