
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  اقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانْشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ

1  The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has split.

٢  وَإِنْ يَرَوْا آيَةً يُعْرِضُوا وَيَقُولُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرٌّ

2  Yet whenever they see a miracle, they turn away, and say, "Continuous magic."

٣  وَكَذَّبُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا أَهْوَاءَهُمْ ۚ وَكُلُّ أَمْرٍ مُسْتَقِرٌّ

3  They lied, and followed their opinions, but everything has its time.

٤  وَلَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ مِنَ الْأَنْبَاءِ مَا فِيهِ مُزْدَجَرٌ

4  And there came to them news containing a deterrent.

٥  حِكْمَةٌ بَالِغَةٌ ۖ فَمَا تُغْنِ النُّذُرُ

5  Profound wisdom-but warnings are of no avail.

٦  فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ ۘ يَوْمَ يَدْعُ الدَّاعِ إِلَىٰ شَيْءٍ نُكُرٍ

6  So turn away from them. On the Day when the Caller calls to something terrible.

٧  خُشَّعًا أَبْصَارُهُمْ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ كَأَنَّهُمْ جَرَادٌ مُنْتَشِرٌ

7  Their eyes humiliated, they will emerge from the graves, as if they were swarming locusts.

٨  مُهْطِعِينَ إِلَى الدَّاعِ ۖ يَقُولُ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا يَوْمٌ عَسِرٌ

8  Scrambling towards the Caller, the disbelievers will say, "This is a difficult Day."

٩  كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ فَكَذَّبُوا عَبْدَنَا وَقَالُوا مَجْنُونٌ وَازْدُجِرَ

9  Before them the people of Noah disbelieved. They rejected Our servant, and said, "Crazy," and he was rebuked.

١٠  فَدَعَا رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَغْلُوبٌ فَانْتَصِرْ

10  So he appealed to his Lord, "I am overwhelmed, so help me."

١١  فَفَتَحْنَا أَبْوَابَ السَّمَاءِ بِمَاءٍ مُنْهَمِرٍ

11  So We opened the floodgates of heaven with water pouring down.

١٢  وَفَجَّرْنَا الْأَرْضَ عُيُونًا فَالْتَقَى الْمَاءُ عَلَىٰ أَمْرٍ قَدْ قُدِرَ

12  And We made the earth burst with springs, and the waters met for a purpose already destined.

١٣  وَحَمَلْنَاهُ عَلَىٰ ذَاتِ أَلْوَاحٍ وَدُسُرٍ

13  And We carried him on a craft of planks and nails.

١٤  تَجْرِي بِأَعْيُنِنَا جَزَاءً لِمَنْ كَانَ كُفِرَ

14  Sailing before Our eyes; a reward for him who was rejected.

١٥  وَلَقَدْ تَرَكْنَاهَا آيَةً فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ

15  And We left it as a sign. Is there anyone who would take heed?

١٦  فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ

16  So how were My punishment and My warnings?

١٧  وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ

17  We made the Quran easy to learn. Is there anyone who would learn?

١٨  كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ

18  Aad denied the truth. So how were My punishment and My warnings?

١٩  إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيحًا صَرْصَرًا فِي يَوْمِ نَحْسٍ مُسْتَمِرٍّ

19  We unleashed upon them a screaming wind, on a day of unrelenting misery.

٢٠  تَنْزِعُ النَّاسَ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ مُنْقَعِرٍ

20  Plucking the people away, as though they were trunks of uprooted palm-trees.

٢١  فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ

21  So how were My punishment and My warnings?

٢٢  وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ

22  We made the Quran easy to remember. Is there anyone who would remember?

٢٣  كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ بِالنُّذُرِ

23  Thamood rejected the warnings.

٢٤  فَقَالُوا أَبَشَرًا مِنَّا وَاحِدًا نَتَّبِعُهُ إِنَّا إِذًا لَفِي ضَلَالٍ وَسُعُرٍ

24  They said, "Are we to follow one of us, a human being? We would then go astray, and end up in Hell.

٢٥  أَأُلْقِيَ الذِّكْرُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا بَلْ هُوَ كَذَّابٌ أَشِرٌ

25  Was the message given to him, out of all of us? In fact, he is a wicked liar."

٢٦  سَيَعْلَمُونَ غَدًا مَنِ الْكَذَّابُ الْأَشِرُ

26  They will know tomorrow who the wicked liar is.

٢٧  إِنَّا مُرْسِلُو النَّاقَةِ فِتْنَةً لَهُمْ فَارْتَقِبْهُمْ وَاصْطَبِرْ

27  We are sending the she-camel as a test for them; so watch them and be patient.

٢٨  وَنَبِّئْهُمْ أَنَّ الْمَاءَ قِسْمَةٌ بَيْنَهُمْ ۖ كُلُّ شِرْبٍ مُحْتَضَرٌ

28  And inform them that the water is to be shared between them; each share of drink made available.

٢٩  فَنَادَوْا صَاحِبَهُمْ فَتَعَاطَىٰ فَعَقَرَ

29  But they called their friend, and he dared, and he slaughtered.

٣٠  فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ

30  So how were My punishment and My warnings?

٣١  إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَكَانُوا كَهَشِيمِ الْمُحْتَظِرِ

31  We sent against them a single Scream, and they became like crushed hay.

٣٢  وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ

32  We made the Quran easy to understand. Is there anyone who would understand?

٣٣  كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ بِالنُّذُرِ

33  The people of Lot rejected the warnings.

٣٤  إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حَاصِبًا إِلَّا آلَ لُوطٍ ۖ نَجَّيْنَاهُمْ بِسَحَرٍ

34  We unleashed upon them a shower of stones, except for the family of Lot; We rescued them at dawn.

٣٥  نِعْمَةً مِنْ عِنْدِنَا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي مَنْ شَكَرَ

35  A blessing from Us. Thus We reward the thankful.

٣٦  وَلَقَدْ أَنْذَرَهُمْ بَطْشَتَنَا فَتَمَارَوْا بِالنُّذُرِ

36  He had warned them of Our onslaught, but they dismissed the warnings.

٣٧  وَلَقَدْ رَاوَدُوهُ عَنْ ضَيْفِهِ فَطَمَسْنَا أَعْيُنَهُمْ فَذُوقُوا عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ

37  They even lusted for his guest, so We obliterated their eyes. "So taste My punishment and My warnings."

٣٨  وَلَقَدْ صَبَّحَهُمْ بُكْرَةً عَذَابٌ مُسْتَقِرٌّ

38  Early morning brought upon them enduring punishment.

٣٩  فَذُوقُوا عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ

39  So taste My punishment and My warnings.

٤٠  وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ

40  We made the Quran easy to memorize. Is there anyone who would memorize?

٤١  وَلَقَدْ جَاءَ آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ النُّذُرُ

41  The warnings also came to the people of Pharaoh.

٤٢  كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا كُلِّهَا فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ أَخْذَ عَزِيزٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ

42  They rejected Our signs, all of them, so We seized them-the seizure of an Almighty Omnipotent.

٤٣  أَكُفَّارُكُمْ خَيْرٌ مِنْ أُولَٰئِكُمْ أَمْ لَكُمْ بَرَاءَةٌ فِي الزُّبُرِ

43  Are your unbelievers better than all those? Or do you have immunity in the scriptures?

٤٤  أَمْ يَقُولُونَ نَحْنُ جَمِيعٌ مُنْتَصِرٌ

44  Or do they say, "We are united, and we will be victorious"?

٤٥  سَيُهْزَمُ الْجَمْعُ وَيُوَلُّونَ الدُّبُرَ

45  The multitude will be defeated, and they will turn their backs.

٤٦  بَلِ السَّاعَةُ مَوْعِدُهُمْ وَالسَّاعَةُ أَدْهَىٰ وَأَمَرُّ

46  The Hour is their appointed time-the Hour is more disastrous, and most bitter.

٤٧  إِنَّ الْمُجْرِمِينَ فِي ضَلَالٍ وَسُعُرٍ

47  The wicked are in confusion and madness.

٤٨  يَوْمَ يُسْحَبُونَ فِي النَّارِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ ذُوقُوا مَسَّ سَقَرَ

48  The Day when they are dragged upon their faces into the Fire: "Taste the touch of Saqar."

٤٩  إِنَّا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَاهُ بِقَدَرٍ

49  Everything We created is precisely measured.

٥٠  وَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ

50  And Our command is but once, like the twinkling of an eye.

٥١  وَلَقَدْ أَهْلَكْنَا أَشْيَاعَكُمْ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ

51  We have destroyed your likes. Is there anyone who would ponder?

٥٢  وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ فَعَلُوهُ فِي الزُّبُرِ

52  Everything they have done is in the Books.

٥٣  وَكُلُّ صَغِيرٍ وَكَبِيرٍ مُسْتَطَرٌ

53  Everything, small or large, is written down.

٥٤  إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَهَرٍ

54  The righteous will be amidst gardens and rivers.

٥٥  فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ

55  In an assembly of virtue, in the presence of an Omnipotent King.