
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  لَا أُقْسِمُ بِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ

1  I swear by the Day of Resurrection.

٢  وَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالنَّفْسِ اللَّوَّامَةِ

2  And I swear by the blaming soul.

٣  أَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَلَّنْ نَجْمَعَ عِظَامَهُ

3  Does man think that We will not reassemble his bones?

٤  بَلَىٰ قَادِرِينَ عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُسَوِّيَ بَنَانَهُ

4  Yes indeed; We are Able to reconstruct his fingertips.

٥  بَلْ يُرِيدُ الْإِنْسَانُ لِيَفْجُرَ أَمَامَهُ

5  But man wants to deny what is ahead of him.

٦  يَسْأَلُ أَيَّانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ

6  He asks, "When is the Day of Resurrection?"

٧  فَإِذَا بَرِقَ الْبَصَرُ

7  When vision is dazzled.

٨  وَخَسَفَ الْقَمَرُ

8  And the moon is eclipsed.

٩  وَجُمِعَ الشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ

9  And the sun and the moon are joined together.

١٠  يَقُولُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَيْنَ الْمَفَرُّ

10  On that Day, man will say, "Where is the escape?"

١١  كَلَّا لَا وَزَرَ

11  No indeed! There is no refuge.

١٢  إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمُسْتَقَرُّ

12  To your Lord on that Day is the settlement.

١٣  يُنَبَّأُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ

13  On that Day man will be informed of everything he put forward, and everything he left behind.

١٤  بَلِ الْإِنْسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ

14  And man will be evidence against himself.

١٥  وَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ

15  Even as he presents his excuses.

١٦  لَا تُحَرِّكْ بِهِ لِسَانَكَ لِتَعْجَلَ بِهِ

16  Do not wag your tongue with it, to hurry on with it.

١٧  إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا جَمْعَهُ وَقُرْآنَهُ

17  Upon Us is its collection and its recitation.

١٨  فَإِذَا قَرَأْنَاهُ فَاتَّبِعْ قُرْآنَهُ

18  Then, when We have recited it, follow its recitation.

١٩  ثُمَّ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا بَيَانَهُ

19  Then upon Us is its explanation.

٢٠  كَلَّا بَلْ تُحِبُّونَ الْعَاجِلَةَ

20  Alas, you love the fleeting life.

٢١  وَتَذَرُونَ الْآخِرَةَ

21  And you disregard the Hereafter.

٢٢  وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاضِرَةٌ

22  Faces on that Day will be radiant.

٢٣  إِلَىٰ رَبِّهَا نَاظِرَةٌ

23  Looking towards their Lord.

٢٤  وَوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ بَاسِرَةٌ

24  And faces on that Day will be gloomy.

٢٥  تَظُنُّ أَنْ يُفْعَلَ بِهَا فَاقِرَةٌ

25  Realizing that a back-breaker has befallen them.

٢٦  كَلَّا إِذَا بَلَغَتِ التَّرَاقِيَ

26  Indeed, when it has reached the breast-bones.

٢٧  وَقِيلَ مَنْ ۜ رَاقٍ

27  And it is said, "Who is the healer?"

٢٨  وَظَنَّ أَنَّهُ الْفِرَاقُ

28  And He realizes that it is the parting.

٢٩  وَالْتَفَّتِ السَّاقُ بِالسَّاقِ

29  And leg is entwined with leg.

٣٠  إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمَسَاقُ

30  To your Lord on that Day is the drive.

٣١  فَلَا صَدَّقَ وَلَا صَلَّىٰ

31  He neither believed nor prayed.

٣٢  وَلَٰكِنْ كَذَّبَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ

32  But he denied and turned away.

٣٣  ثُمَّ ذَهَبَ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ يَتَمَطَّىٰ

33  Then he went to his family, full of pride.

٣٤  أَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ

34  Woe to you; and woe.

٣٥  ثُمَّ أَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ

35  Then again: Woe to you; and woe.

٣٦  أَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَنْ يُتْرَكَ سُدًى

36  Does man think that he will be left without purpose?

٣٧  أَلَمْ يَكُ نُطْفَةً مِنْ مَنِيٍّ يُمْنَىٰ

37  Was he not a drop of ejaculated semen?

٣٨  ثُمَّ كَانَ عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقَ فَسَوَّىٰ

38  Then he became a clot. And He created and proportioned?

٣٩  فَجَعَلَ مِنْهُ الزَّوْجَيْنِ الذَّكَرَ وَالْأُنْثَىٰ

39  And made of him the two sexes, the male and the female?

٤٠  أَلَيْسَ ذَٰلِكَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ

40  Is He not Able to revive the dead?