
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  إِذَا وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ

1  When the inevitable occurs.

٢  لَيْسَ لِوَقْعَتِهَا كَاذِبَةٌ

2  Of its occurrence, there is no denial.

٣  خَافِضَةٌ رَافِعَةٌ

3  Bringing low, raising high.

٤  إِذَا رُجَّتِ الْأَرْضُ رَجًّا

4  When the earth is shaken with a shock.

٥  وَبُسَّتِ الْجِبَالُ بَسًّا

5  And the mountains are crushed and crumbled.

٦  فَكَانَتْ هَبَاءً مُنْبَثًّا

6  And they become scattered dust.

٧  وَكُنْتُمْ أَزْوَاجًا ثَلَاثَةً

7  And you become three classes.

٨  فَأَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ

8  Those on the Right-what of those on the Right?

٩  وَأَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ

9  And those on the Left-what of those on the Left?

١٠  وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ

10  And the forerunners, the forerunners.

١١  أُولَٰئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ

11  Those are the nearest.

١٢  فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ

12  In the Gardens of Bliss.

١٣  ثُلَّةٌ مِنَ الْأَوَّلِينَ

13  A throng from the ancients.

١٤  وَقَلِيلٌ مِنَ الْآخِرِينَ

14  And a small band from the latecomers.

١٥  عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مَوْضُونَةٍ

15  On luxurious furnishings.

١٦  مُتَّكِئِينَ عَلَيْهَا مُتَقَابِلِينَ

16  Reclining on them, facing one another.

١٧  يَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ وِلْدَانٌ مُخَلَّدُونَ

17  Serving them will be immortalized youth.

١٨  بِأَكْوَابٍ وَأَبَارِيقَ وَكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ

18  With cups, pitchers, and sparkling drinks.

١٩  لَا يُصَدَّعُونَ عَنْهَا وَلَا يُنْزِفُونَ

19  Causing them neither headache, nor intoxication.

٢٠  وَفَاكِهَةٍ مِمَّا يَتَخَيَّرُونَ

20  And fruits of their choice.

٢١  وَلَحْمِ طَيْرٍ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ

21  And meat of birds that they may desire.

٢٢  وَحُورٌ عِينٌ

22  And lovely companions.

٢٣  كَأَمْثَالِ اللُّؤْلُؤِ الْمَكْنُونِ

23  The likenesses of treasured pearls.

٢٤  جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ

24  As a reward for what they used to do.

٢٥  لَا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا وَلَا تَأْثِيمًا

25  Therein they will hear no nonsense, and no accusations.

٢٦  إِلَّا قِيلًا سَلَامًا سَلَامًا

26  But only the greeting: "Peace, peace."

٢٧  وَأَصْحَابُ الْيَمِينِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْيَمِينِ

27  And those on the Right-what of those on the Right?

٢٨  فِي سِدْرٍ مَخْضُودٍ

28  In lush orchards.

٢٩  وَطَلْحٍ مَنْضُودٍ

29  And sweet-smelling plants.

٣٠  وَظِلٍّ مَمْدُودٍ

30  And extended shade.

٣١  وَمَاءٍ مَسْكُوبٍ

31  And outpouring water.

٣٢  وَفَاكِهَةٍ كَثِيرَةٍ

32  And abundant fruit.

٣٣  لَا مَقْطُوعَةٍ وَلَا مَمْنُوعَةٍ

33  Neither withheld, nor forbidden.

٣٤  وَفُرُشٍ مَرْفُوعَةٍ

34  And uplifted mattresses.

٣٥  إِنَّا أَنْشَأْنَاهُنَّ إِنْشَاءً

35  We have created them of special creation.

٣٦  فَجَعَلْنَاهُنَّ أَبْكَارًا

36  And made them virgins.

٣٧  عُرُبًا أَتْرَابًا

37  Tender and un-aging.

٣٨  لِأَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ

38  For those on the Right.

٣٩  ثُلَّةٌ مِنَ الْأَوَّلِينَ

39  A throng from the ancients.

٤٠  وَثُلَّةٌ مِنَ الْآخِرِينَ

40  And a throng from the latecomers.

٤١  وَأَصْحَابُ الشِّمَالِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الشِّمَالِ

41  And those on the Left-what of those on the Left?

٤٢  فِي سَمُومٍ وَحَمِيمٍ

42  Amid searing wind and boiling water.

٤٣  وَظِلٍّ مِنْ يَحْمُومٍ

43  And a shadow of thick smoke.

٤٤  لَا بَارِدٍ وَلَا كَرِيمٍ

44  Neither cool, nor refreshing.

٤٥  إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَبْلَ ذَٰلِكَ مُتْرَفِينَ

45  They had lived before that in luxury.

٤٦  وَكَانُوا يُصِرُّونَ عَلَى الْحِنْثِ الْعَظِيمِ

46  And they used to persist in immense wrongdoing.

٤٧  وَكَانُوا يَقُولُونَ أَئِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ

47  And they used to say, "When we are dead and turned into dust and bones, are we to be resurrected?

٤٨  أَوَآبَاؤُنَا الْأَوَّلُونَ

48  And our ancient ancestors too?"

٤٩  قُلْ إِنَّ الْأَوَّلِينَ وَالْآخِرِينَ

49  Say, "The first and the last.

٥٠  لَمَجْمُوعُونَ إِلَىٰ مِيقَاتِ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ

50  Will be gathered for the appointment of a familiar Day."

٥١  ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ أَيُّهَا الضَّالُّونَ الْمُكَذِّبُونَ

51  Then you, you misguided, who deny the truth.

٥٢  لَآكِلُونَ مِنْ شَجَرٍ مِنْ زَقُّومٍ

52  Will be eating from the Tree of Bitterness.

٥٣  فَمَالِئُونَ مِنْهَا الْبُطُونَ

53  Will be filling your bellies with it.

٥٤  فَشَارِبُونَ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الْحَمِيمِ

54  Will be drinking on top of it boiling water.

٥٥  فَشَارِبُونَ شُرْبَ الْهِيمِ

55  Drinking like thirsty camels drink.

٥٦  هَٰذَا نُزُلُهُمْ يَوْمَ الدِّينِ

56  That is their hospitality on the Day of Retribution.

٥٧  نَحْنُ خَلَقْنَاكُمْ فَلَوْلَا تُصَدِّقُونَ

57  We created you-if only you would believe!

٥٨  أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا تُمْنُونَ

58  Have you seen what you ejaculate?

٥٩  أَأَنْتُمْ تَخْلُقُونَهُ أَمْ نَحْنُ الْخَالِقُونَ

59  Is it you who create it, or are We the Creator?

٦٠  نَحْنُ قَدَّرْنَا بَيْنَكُمُ الْمَوْتَ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَسْبُوقِينَ

60  We have decreed death among you, and We will not be outstripped.

٦١  عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُبَدِّلَ أَمْثَالَكُمْ وَنُنْشِئَكُمْ فِي مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ

61  In replacing you with your likes, and transforming you into what you do not know.

٦٢  وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْتُمُ النَّشْأَةَ الْأُولَىٰ فَلَوْلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ

62  You have known the first formation; if only you would remember.

٦٣  أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا تَحْرُثُونَ

63  Have you seen what you cultivate?

٦٤  أَأَنْتُمْ تَزْرَعُونَهُ أَمْ نَحْنُ الزَّارِعُونَ

64  Is it you who make it grow, or are We the Grower?

٦٥  لَوْ نَشَاءُ لَجَعَلْنَاهُ حُطَامًا فَظَلْتُمْ تَفَكَّهُونَ

65  If We will, We can turn it into rubble; then you will lament.

٦٦  إِنَّا لَمُغْرَمُونَ

66  "We are penalized.

٦٧  بَلْ نَحْنُ مَحْرُومُونَ

67  No, we are being deprived."

٦٨  أَفَرَأَيْتُمُ الْمَاءَ الَّذِي تَشْرَبُونَ

68  Have you seen the water you drink?

٦٩  أَأَنْتُمْ أَنْزَلْتُمُوهُ مِنَ الْمُزْنِ أَمْ نَحْنُ الْمُنْزِلُونَ

69  Is it you who sent it down from the clouds, or are We the Sender?

٧٠  لَوْ نَشَاءُ جَعَلْنَاهُ أُجَاجًا فَلَوْلَا تَشْكُرُونَ

70  If We will, We can make it salty. Will you not be thankful?

٧١  أَفَرَأَيْتُمُ النَّارَ الَّتِي تُورُونَ

71  Have you seen the fire you kindle?

٧٢  أَأَنْتُمْ أَنْشَأْتُمْ شَجَرَتَهَا أَمْ نَحْنُ الْمُنْشِئُونَ

72  Is it you who produce its tree, or are We the Producer?

٧٣  نَحْنُ جَعَلْنَاهَا تَذْكِرَةً وَمَتَاعًا لِلْمُقْوِينَ

73  We have made it a reminder, and a comfort for the users.

٧٤  فَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ

74  So glorify the Name of your Great Lord.

٧٥  فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِمَوَاقِعِ النُّجُومِ

75  I swear by the locations of the stars.

٧٦  وَإِنَّهُ لَقَسَمٌ لَوْ تَعْلَمُونَ عَظِيمٌ

76  It is an oath, if you only knew, that is tremendous.

٧٧  إِنَّهُ لَقُرْآنٌ كَرِيمٌ

77  It is a noble Quran.

٧٨  فِي كِتَابٍ مَكْنُونٍ

78  In a well-protected Book.

٧٩  لَا يَمَسُّهُ إِلَّا الْمُطَهَّرُونَ

79  None can grasp it except the purified.

٨٠  تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

80  A revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.

٨١  أَفَبِهَٰذَا الْحَدِيثِ أَنْتُمْ مُدْهِنُونَ

81  Is it this discourse that you take so lightly?

٨٢  وَتَجْعَلُونَ رِزْقَكُمْ أَنَّكُمْ تُكَذِّبُونَ

82  And you make it your livelihood to deny it?

٨٣  فَلَوْلَا إِذَا بَلَغَتِ الْحُلْقُومَ

83  So when it has reached the throat.

٨٤  وَأَنْتُمْ حِينَئِذٍ تَنْظُرُونَ

84  As you are looking on.

٨٥  وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ

85  We are nearer to it than you are, but you do not see.

٨٦  فَلَوْلَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ غَيْرَ مَدِينِينَ

86  If you are not held to account.

٨٧  تَرْجِعُونَهَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ

87  Then bring it back, if you are truthful.

٨٨  فَأَمَّا إِنْ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ

88  But if he is one of those brought near.

٨٩  فَرَوْحٌ وَرَيْحَانٌ وَجَنَّتُ نَعِيمٍ

89  Then happiness, and flowers, and Garden of Delights.

٩٠  وَأَمَّا إِنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ

90  And if he is one of those on the Right.

٩١  فَسَلَامٌ لَكَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ

91  Then, "Peace upon you," from those on the Right.

٩٢  وَأَمَّا إِنْ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ الضَّالِّينَ

92  But if he is one of the deniers, the mistaken.

٩٣  فَنُزُلٌ مِنْ حَمِيمٍ

93  Then a welcome of Inferno.

٩٤  وَتَصْلِيَةُ جَحِيمٍ

94  And burning in Hell.

٩٥  إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ حَقُّ الْيَقِينِ

95  This is the certain truth.

٩٦  فَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ

96  So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Magnificent