
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالنَّازِعَاتِ غَرْقًا

1  By those who snatch violently.

٢  وَالنَّاشِطَاتِ نَشْطًا

2  And those who remove gently.

٣  وَالسَّابِحَاتِ سَبْحًا

3  And those who glide smoothly.

٤  فَالسَّابِقَاتِ سَبْقًا

4  And those who race swiftly.

٥  فَالْمُدَبِّرَاتِ أَمْرًا

5  And those who regulate events.

٦  يَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الرَّاجِفَةُ

6  On the Day when the Quake quakes.

٧  تَتْبَعُهَا الرَّادِفَةُ

7  And is followed by the Successor.

٨  قُلُوبٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاجِفَةٌ

8  Hearts on that Day will be pounding.

٩  أَبْصَارُهَا خَاشِعَةٌ

9  Their sights downcast.

١٠  يَقُولُونَ أَإِنَّا لَمَرْدُودُونَ فِي الْحَافِرَةِ

10  They say, "Are we to be restored to the original condition?

١١  أَإِذَا كُنَّا عِظَامًا نَخِرَةً

11  When we have become hollow bones?"

١٢  قَالُوا تِلْكَ إِذًا كَرَّةٌ خَاسِرَةٌ

12  They say, "This is a losing proposition."

١٣  فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ

13  But it will be only a single nudge.

١٤  فَإِذَا هُمْ بِالسَّاهِرَةِ

14  And they will be awake.

١٥  هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ مُوسَىٰ

15  Has the story of Moses reached you?

١٦  إِذْ نَادَاهُ رَبُّهُ بِالْوَادِ الْمُقَدَّسِ طُوًى

16  When His Lord called out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa.

١٧  اذْهَبْ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَىٰ

17  "Go to Pharaoh-he has transgressed."

١٨  فَقُلْ هَلْ لَكَ إِلَىٰ أَنْ تَزَكَّىٰ

18  And say, "Do you care to be cleansed?

١٩  وَأَهْدِيَكَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ فَتَخْشَىٰ

19  And I will guide you to your Lord, and you will turn reverent."

٢٠  فَأَرَاهُ الْآيَةَ الْكُبْرَىٰ

20  He showed him the Greatest Miracle.

٢١  فَكَذَّبَ وَعَصَىٰ

21  But he denied and defied.

٢٢  ثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ يَسْعَىٰ

22  Then turned his back, and tried.

٢٣  فَحَشَرَ فَنَادَىٰ

23  And gathered and proclaimed.

٢٤  فَقَالَ أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الْأَعْلَىٰ

24  He said, "I am your Lord, the most high."

٢٥  فَأَخَذَهُ اللَّهُ نَكَالَ الْآخِرَةِ وَالْأُولَىٰ

25  So God seized him with an exemplary punishment, in the last and in the first.

٢٦  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِمَنْ يَخْشَىٰ

26  In this is a lesson for whoever fears.

٢٧  أَأَنْتُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمِ السَّمَاءُ ۚ بَنَاهَا

27  Are you more difficult to create, or the heaven? He constructed it.

٢٨  رَفَعَ سَمْكَهَا فَسَوَّاهَا

28  He raised its masses, and proportioned it.

٢٩  وَأَغْطَشَ لَيْلَهَا وَأَخْرَجَ ضُحَاهَا

29  And He dimmed its night, and brought out its daylight.

٣٠  وَالْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ دَحَاهَا

30  And the earth after that He spread.

٣١  أَخْرَجَ مِنْهَا مَاءَهَا وَمَرْعَاهَا

31  And from it, He produced its water and its pasture.

٣٢  وَالْجِبَالَ أَرْسَاهَا

32  And the mountains, He anchored.

٣٣  مَتَاعًا لَكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ

33  A source of enjoyment for you and for your animals.

٣٤  فَإِذَا جَاءَتِ الطَّامَّةُ الْكُبْرَىٰ

34  But when the Great Cataclysm arrives.

٣٥  يَوْمَ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنْسَانُ مَا سَعَىٰ

35  A Day when man will remember what he has endeavored.

٣٦  وَبُرِّزَتِ الْجَحِيمُ لِمَنْ يَرَىٰ

36  And Hell will be displayed to whoever sees.

٣٧  فَأَمَّا مَنْ طَغَىٰ

37  As for him who was defiant.

٣٨  وَآثَرَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا

38  And preferred the life of this world.

٣٩  فَإِنَّ الْجَحِيمَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ

39  Then Hell is the shelter.

٤٠  وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَى النَّفْسَ عَنِ الْهَوَىٰ

40  But as for him who feared the Standing of his Lord, and restrained the self from desires.

٤١  فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ

41  Then Paradise is the shelter.

٤٢  يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا

42  They ask you about the Hour, "When will it take place?"

٤٣  فِيمَ أَنْتَ مِنْ ذِكْرَاهَا

43  You have no knowledge of it.

٤٤  إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ مُنْتَهَاهَا

44  To your Lord is its finality.

٤٥  إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرُ مَنْ يَخْشَاهَا

45  You are just a warner for whoever dreads it.

٤٦  كَأَنَّهُمْ يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَهَا لَمْ يَلْبَثُوا إِلَّا عَشِيَّةً أَوْ ضُحَاهَا

46  On the Day when they witness it-as though they only stayed an evening, or its morning.