
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالنَّجْمِ إِذَا هَوَىٰ

1  By the star as it goes down.

٢  مَا ضَلَّ صَاحِبُكُمْ وَمَا غَوَىٰ

2  Your friend has not gone astray, nor has he erred.

٣  وَمَا يَنْطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوَىٰ

3  Nor does he speak out of desire.

٤  إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا وَحْيٌ يُوحَىٰ

4  It is but a revelation revealed.

٥  عَلَّمَهُ شَدِيدُ الْقُوَىٰ

5  Taught to him by the Extremely Powerful.

٦  ذُو مِرَّةٍ فَاسْتَوَىٰ

6  The one of vigor. He settled.

٧  وَهُوَ بِالْأُفُقِ الْأَعْلَىٰ

7  While he was at the highest horizon.

٨  ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّىٰ

8  Then he came near, and hovered around.

٩  فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَىٰ

9  He was within two bows' length, or closer.

١٠  فَأَوْحَىٰ إِلَىٰ عَبْدِهِ مَا أَوْحَىٰ

10  Then He revealed to His servant what He revealed.

١١  مَا كَذَبَ الْفُؤَادُ مَا رَأَىٰ

11  The heart did not lie about what it saw.

١٢  أَفَتُمَارُونَهُ عَلَىٰ مَا يَرَىٰ

12  Will you dispute with him concerning what he saw?

١٣  وَلَقَدْ رَآهُ نَزْلَةً أُخْرَىٰ

13  He saw him on another descent.

١٤  عِنْدَ سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهَىٰ

14  At the Lotus Tree of the Extremity.

١٥  عِنْدَهَا جَنَّةُ الْمَأْوَىٰ

15  Near which is the Garden of Repose.

١٦  إِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشَىٰ

16  As there covered the Lotus Tree what covered it.

١٧  مَا زَاغَ الْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغَىٰ

17  The sight did not waver, nor did it exceed.

١٨  لَقَدْ رَأَىٰ مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِ الْكُبْرَىٰ

18  He saw some of the Great Signs of his Lord.

١٩  أَفَرَأَيْتُمُ اللَّاتَ وَالْعُزَّىٰ

19  Have you considered al-Lat and al-Uzza?

٢٠  وَمَنَاةَ الثَّالِثَةَ الْأُخْرَىٰ

20  And Manat, the third one, the other?

٢١  أَلَكُمُ الذَّكَرُ وَلَهُ الْأُنْثَىٰ

21  Are you to have the males, and He the females?

٢٢  تِلْكَ إِذًا قِسْمَةٌ ضِيزَىٰ

22  What a bizarre distribution.

٢٣  إِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا أَسْمَاءٌ سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمْ مَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ بِهَا مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ ۚ إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَمَا تَهْوَى الْأَنْفُسُ ۖ وَلَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ مِنْ رَبِّهِمُ الْهُدَىٰ

23  These are nothing but names, which you have devised, you and your ancestors, for which God sent down no authority. They follow nothing but assumptions, and what the ego desires, even though guidance has come to them from their Lord.

٢٤  أَمْ لِلْإِنْسَانِ مَا تَمَنَّىٰ

24  Or is the human being to have whatever he desires?

٢٥  فَلِلَّهِ الْآخِرَةُ وَالْأُولَىٰ

25  To God belong the Last and the First.

٢٦  وَكَمْ مِنْ مَلَكٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ لَا تُغْنِي شَفَاعَتُهُمْ شَيْئًا إِلَّا مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ يَأْذَنَ اللَّهُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَرْضَىٰ

26  How many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession avails nothing, except after God gives permission to whomever He wills, and approves?

٢٧  إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ لَيُسَمُّونَ الْمَلَائِكَةَ تَسْمِيَةَ الْأُنْثَىٰ

27  Those who do not believe in the Hereafter give the angels the names of females.

٢٨  وَمَا لَهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ عِلْمٍ ۖ إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ ۖ وَإِنَّ الظَّنَّ لَا يُغْنِي مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا

28  They have no knowledge of that. They only follow assumptions, and assumptions are no substitute for the truth.

٢٩  فَأَعْرِضْ عَنْ مَنْ تَوَلَّىٰ عَنْ ذِكْرِنَا وَلَمْ يُرِدْ إِلَّا الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا

29  So avoid him who has turned away from Our remembrance, and desires nothing but the present life.

٣٠  ذَٰلِكَ مَبْلَغُهُمْ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ ۚ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ ضَلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنِ اهْتَدَىٰ

30  That is the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path, and He knows best who has accepted guidance.

٣١  وَلِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ لِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا بِالْحُسْنَى

31  To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. He will repay those who do evil according to their deeds, and recompense those who do good with the best.

٣٢  الَّذِينَ يَجْتَنِبُونَ كَبَائِرَ الْإِثْمِ وَالْفَوَاحِشَ إِلَّا اللَّمَمَ ۚ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ وَاسِعُ الْمَغْفِرَةِ ۚ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِكُمْ إِذْ أَنْشَأَكُمْ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ وَإِذْ أَنْتُمْ أَجِنَّةٌ فِي بُطُونِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ ۖ فَلَا تُزَكُّوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ ۖ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنِ اتَّقَىٰ

32  Those who avoid gross sins and indecencies-except for minor lapses-your Lord is of Vast Forgiveness. He knows you well, ever since He created you from the earth, and ever since you were embryos in your mothers' wombs. So do not acclaim your own virtue; He is fully aware of the righteous.

٣٣  أَفَرَأَيْتَ الَّذِي تَوَلَّىٰ

33  Have you considered him who turned away?

٣٤  وَأَعْطَىٰ قَلِيلًا وَأَكْدَىٰ

34  And gave a little, and held back?

٣٥  أَعِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ الْغَيْبِ فَهُوَ يَرَىٰ

35  Does he possess knowledge of the unseen, and can therefore foresee?

٣٦  أَمْ لَمْ يُنَبَّأْ بِمَا فِي صُحُفِ مُوسَىٰ

36  Or was he not informed of what is in the Scrolls of Moses?

٣٧  وَإِبْرَاهِيمَ الَّذِي وَفَّىٰ

37  And of Abraham, who fulfilled?

٣٨  أَلَّا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَىٰ

38  That no soul bears the burdens of another soul.

٣٩  وَأَنْ لَيْسَ لِلْإِنْسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَىٰ

39  And that the human being attains only what he strives for.

٤٠  وَأَنَّ سَعْيَهُ سَوْفَ يُرَىٰ

40  And that his efforts will be witnessed.

٤١  ثُمَّ يُجْزَاهُ الْجَزَاءَ الْأَوْفَىٰ

41  Then he will be rewarded for it the fullest reward.

٤٢  وَأَنَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ الْمُنْتَهَىٰ

42  And that to your Lord is the finality.

٤٣  وَأَنَّهُ هُوَ أَضْحَكَ وَأَبْكَىٰ

43  And that it is He who causes laughter and weeping.

٤٤  وَأَنَّهُ هُوَ أَمَاتَ وَأَحْيَا

44  And that it is He who gives death and life.

٤٥  وَأَنَّهُ خَلَقَ الزَّوْجَيْنِ الذَّكَرَ وَالْأُنْثَىٰ

45  And that it is He who created the two kinds-the male and the female.

٤٦  مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ إِذَا تُمْنَىٰ

46  From a sperm drop, when emitted.

٤٧  وَأَنَّ عَلَيْهِ النَّشْأَةَ الْأُخْرَىٰ

47  And that upon Him is the next existence.

٤٨  وَأَنَّهُ هُوَ أَغْنَىٰ وَأَقْنَىٰ

48  And that it is He who enriches and impoverishes.

٤٩  وَأَنَّهُ هُوَ رَبُّ الشِّعْرَىٰ

49  And that it is He who is the Lord of Sirius.

٥٠  وَأَنَّهُ أَهْلَكَ عَادًا الْأُولَىٰ

50  And that it is He who destroyed the first Aad.

٥١  وَثَمُودَ فَمَا أَبْقَىٰ

51  And Thamood, sparing no one.

٥٢  وَقَوْمَ نُوحٍ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا هُمْ أَظْلَمَ وَأَطْغَىٰ

52  And the people of Noah before that; for they were most unjust and most oppressive.

٥٣  وَالْمُؤْتَفِكَةَ أَهْوَىٰ

53  And He toppled the ruined cities.

٥٤  فَغَشَّاهَا مَا غَشَّىٰ

54  And covered them with whatever covered them.

٥٥  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكَ تَتَمَارَىٰ

55  So which of your Lord's marvels can you deny?

٥٦  هَٰذَا نَذِيرٌ مِنَ النُّذُرِ الْأُولَىٰ

56  This is a warning, just like the first warnings.

٥٧  أَزِفَتِ الْآزِفَةُ

57  The inevitable is imminent.

٥٨  لَيْسَ لَهَا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ كَاشِفَةٌ

58  None besides God can unveil it.

٥٩  أَفَمِنْ هَٰذَا الْحَدِيثِ تَعْجَبُونَ

59  Do you marvel at this discourse?

٦٠  وَتَضْحَكُونَ وَلَا تَبْكُونَ

60  And laugh, and do not weep?

٦١  وَأَنْتُمْ سَامِدُونَ

61  Lost in your frivolity?

٦٢  فَاسْجُدُوا لِلَّهِ وَاعْبُدُوا ۩

62  So bow down to God, and worship!