
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  عَمَّ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

1  What are they asking one another about?

٢  عَنِ النَّبَإِ الْعَظِيمِ

2  About the Great Event.

٣  الَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ مُخْتَلِفُونَ

3  About which they disagree.

٤  كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ

4  Surely, they will find out.

٥  ثُمَّ كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ

5  Most certainly, they will find out.

٦  أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ مِهَادًا

6  Did We not make the earth a cradle?

٧  وَالْجِبَالَ أَوْتَادًا

7  And the mountains pegs?

٨  وَخَلَقْنَاكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا

8  And created you in pairs?

٩  وَجَعَلْنَا نَوْمَكُمْ سُبَاتًا

9  And made your sleep for rest?

١٠  وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا

10  And made the night a cover?

١١  وَجَعَلْنَا النَّهَارَ مَعَاشًا

11  And made the day for livelihood?

١٢  وَبَنَيْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعًا شِدَادًا

12  And built above you seven strong ones?

١٣  وَجَعَلْنَا سِرَاجًا وَهَّاجًا

13  And placed a blazing lamp?

١٤  وَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ الْمُعْصِرَاتِ مَاءً ثَجَّاجًا

14  And brought down from the clouds pouring water?

١٥  لِنُخْرِجَ بِهِ حَبًّا وَنَبَاتًا

15  To produce with it grains and vegetation?

١٦  وَجَنَّاتٍ أَلْفَافًا

16  And luxuriant gardens?

١٧  إِنَّ يَوْمَ الْفَصْلِ كَانَ مِيقَاتًا

17  The Day of Sorting has been appointed.

١٨  يَوْمَ يُنْفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجًا

18  The Day when the Trumpet is blown, and you will come in droves.

١٩  وَفُتِحَتِ السَّمَاءُ فَكَانَتْ أَبْوَابًا

19  And the sky is opened up, and becomes gateways.

٢٠  وَسُيِّرَتِ الْجِبَالُ فَكَانَتْ سَرَابًا

20  And the mountains are set in motion, and become a mirage.

٢١  إِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ كَانَتْ مِرْصَادًا

21  Hell is lying in ambush.

٢٢  لِلطَّاغِينَ مَآبًا

22  For the oppressors, a destination.

٢٣  لَابِثِينَ فِيهَا أَحْقَابًا

23  Where they will remain for eons.

٢٤  لَا يَذُوقُونَ فِيهَا بَرْدًا وَلَا شَرَابًا

24  They will taste therein neither coolness, nor drink.

٢٥  إِلَّا حَمِيمًا وَغَسَّاقًا

25  Except boiling water, and freezing hail.

٢٦  جَزَاءً وِفَاقًا

26  A fitting requital.

٢٧  إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا لَا يَرْجُونَ حِسَابًا

27  For they were not anticipating any reckoning.

٢٨  وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا كِذَّابًا

28  And they denied Our signs utterly.

٢٩  وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ كِتَابًا

29  But We have enumerated everything in writing.

٣٠  فَذُوقُوا فَلَنْ نَزِيدَكُمْ إِلَّا عَذَابًا

30  So taste! We will increase you only in suffering.

٣١  إِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ مَفَازًا

31  But for the righteous there is triumph.

٣٢  حَدَائِقَ وَأَعْنَابًا

32  Gardens and vineyards.

٣٣  وَكَوَاعِبَ أَتْرَابًا

33  And splendid spouses, well matched.

٣٤  وَكَأْسًا دِهَاقًا

34  And delicious drinks.

٣٥  لَا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا وَلَا كِذَّابًا

35  They will hear therein neither gossip, nor lies.

٣٦  جَزَاءً مِنْ رَبِّكَ عَطَاءً حِسَابًا

36  A reward from your Lord, a fitting gift.

٣٧  رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا الرَّحْمَٰنِ ۖ لَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْهُ خِطَابًا

37  Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them-The Most Merciful-none can argue with Him.

٣٨  يَوْمَ يَقُومُ الرُّوحُ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ صَفًّا ۖ لَا يَتَكَلَّمُونَ إِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَقَالَ صَوَابًا

38  On the Day when the Spirit and the angels stand in row. They will not speak, unless it be one permitted by the Most Merciful, and he will say what is right.

٣٩  ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الْحَقُّ ۖ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ مَآبًا

39  That is the Day of Reality. So whoever wills, let him take a way back to his Lord.

٤٠  إِنَّا أَنْذَرْنَاكُمْ عَذَابًا قَرِيبًا يَوْمَ يَنْظُرُ الْمَرْءُ مَا قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاهُ وَيَقُولُ الْكَافِرُ يَا لَيْتَنِي كُنْتُ تُرَابًا

40   We have warned you of a near punishment-the Day when a person will observe what his hands have produced, and the faithless will say, "O, I wish I were dust."