
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  الرَّحْمَٰنُ

1  The Compassionate.

٢  عَلَّمَ الْقُرْآنَ

2  Has taught the Quran.

٣  خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ

3  He created man.

٤  عَلَّمَهُ الْبَيَانَ

4  And taught him clear expression.

٥  الشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ بِحُسْبَانٍ

5  The sun and the moon move according to plan.

٦  وَالنَّجْمُ وَالشَّجَرُ يَسْجُدَانِ

6  And the stars and the trees prostrate themselves.

٧  وَالسَّمَاءَ رَفَعَهَا وَوَضَعَ الْمِيزَانَ

7  And the sky, He raised; and He set up the balance.

٨  أَلَّا تَطْغَوْا فِي الْمِيزَانِ

8  So do not transgress in the balance.

٩  وَأَقِيمُوا الْوَزْنَ بِالْقِسْطِ وَلَا تُخْسِرُوا الْمِيزَانَ

9  But maintain the weights with justice, and do not violate the balance.

١٠  وَالْأَرْضَ وَضَعَهَا لِلْأَنَامِ

10  And the earth; He set up for the creatures.

١١  فِيهَا فَاكِهَةٌ وَالنَّخْلُ ذَاتُ الْأَكْمَامِ

11  In it are fruits, and palms in clusters.

١٢  وَالْحَبُّ ذُو الْعَصْفِ وَالرَّيْحَانُ

12  And grains in the blades, and fragrant plants.

١٣  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

13  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

١٤  خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ كَالْفَخَّارِ

14  He created man from hard clay, like bricks.

١٥  وَخَلَقَ الْجَانَّ مِنْ مَارِجٍ مِنْ نَارٍ

15  And created the jinn from a fusion of fire.

١٦  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

16  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

١٧  رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقَيْنِ وَرَبُّ الْمَغْرِبَيْنِ

17  Lord of the two Easts and Lord of the two Wests.

١٨  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

18  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

١٩  مَرَجَ الْبَحْرَيْنِ يَلْتَقِيَانِ

19  He merged the two seas, converging together.

٢٠  بَيْنَهُمَا بَرْزَخٌ لَا يَبْغِيَانِ

20  Between them is a barrier, which they do not overrun.

٢١  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

21  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٢٢  يَخْرُجُ مِنْهُمَا اللُّؤْلُؤُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ

22  From them emerge pearls and coral.

٢٣  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

23  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٢٤  وَلَهُ الْجَوَارِ الْمُنْشَآتُ فِي الْبَحْرِ كَالْأَعْلَامِ

24  His are the ships, raised above the sea like landmarks.

٢٥  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

25  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٢٦  كُلُّ مَنْ عَلَيْهَا فَانٍ

26  Everyone upon it is perishing.

٢٧  وَيَبْقَىٰ وَجْهُ رَبِّكَ ذُو الْجَلَالِ وَالْإِكْرَامِ

27  But will remain the Presence of your Lord, Full of Majesty and Splendor.

٢٨  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

28  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٢٩  يَسْأَلُهُ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِي شَأْنٍ

29  Everyone in the heavens and the earth asks Him. Every day He is managing.

٣٠  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

30  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٣١  سَنَفْرُغُ لَكُمْ أَيُّهَ الثَّقَلَانِ

31  We will attend to you, O prominent two.

٣٢  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

32  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٣٣  يَا مَعْشَرَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ إِنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ أَنْ تَنْفُذُوا مِنْ أَقْطَارِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ فَانْفُذُوا ۚ لَا تَنْفُذُونَ إِلَّا بِسُلْطَانٍ

33  O society of jinn and humans! If you can pass through the bounds of the heavens and the earth, go ahead and pass. But you will not pass except with authorization.

٣٤  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

34  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٣٥  يُرْسَلُ عَلَيْكُمَا شُوَاظٌ مِنْ نَارٍ وَنُحَاسٌ فَلَا تَنْتَصِرَانِ

35  You will be bombarded with flares of fire and brass, and you will not succeed.

٣٦  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

36  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٣٧  فَإِذَا انْشَقَّتِ السَّمَاءُ فَكَانَتْ وَرْدَةً كَالدِّهَانِ

37  When the sky splits apart, and becomes rose, like paint.

٣٨  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

38  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٣٩  فَيَوْمَئِذٍ لَا يُسْأَلُ عَنْ ذَنْبِهِ إِنْسٌ وَلَا جَانٌّ

39  On that Day, no human and no jinn will be asked about his sins.

٤٠  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

40  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٤١  يُعْرَفُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ بِسِيمَاهُمْ فَيُؤْخَذُ بِالنَّوَاصِي وَالْأَقْدَامِ

41  The guilty will be recognized by their marks; they will be taken by the forelocks and the feet.

٤٢  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

42  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٤٣  هَٰذِهِ جَهَنَّمُ الَّتِي يُكَذِّبُ بِهَا الْمُجْرِمُونَ

43  This is Hell that the guilty denied.

٤٤  يَطُوفُونَ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَ حَمِيمٍ آنٍ

44  They circulate between it and between a seething bath.

٤٥  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

45  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٤٦  وَلِمَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ جَنَّتَانِ

46  But for him who feared the standing of his Lord are two gardens.

٤٧  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

47  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٤٨  ذَوَاتَا أَفْنَانٍ

48  Full of varieties.

٤٩  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

49  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٥٠  فِيهِمَا عَيْنَانِ تَجْرِيَانِ

50  In them are two flowing springs.

٥١  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

51  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٥٢  فِيهِمَا مِنْ كُلِّ فَاكِهَةٍ زَوْجَانِ

52  In them are fruits of every kind, in pairs.

٥٣  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

53  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٥٤  مُتَّكِئِينَ عَلَىٰ فُرُشٍ بَطَائِنُهَا مِنْ إِسْتَبْرَقٍ ۚ وَجَنَى الْجَنَّتَيْنِ دَانٍ

54  Reclining on furnishings lined with brocade, and the fruits of the two gardens are near at hand.

٥٥  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

55  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٥٦  فِيهِنَّ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ لَمْ يَطْمِثْهُنَّ إِنْسٌ قَبْلَهُمْ وَلَا جَانٌّ

56  In them are maidens restraining their glances, untouched before by any man or jinn.

٥٧  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

57  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٥٨  كَأَنَّهُنَّ الْيَاقُوتُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ

58  As though they were rubies and corals.

٥٩  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

59  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٦٠  هَلْ جَزَاءُ الْإِحْسَانِ إِلَّا الْإِحْسَانُ

60  Is the reward of goodness anything but goodness?

٦١  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

61  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٦٢  وَمِنْ دُونِهِمَا جَنَّتَانِ

62  And beneath them are two gardens.

٦٣  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

63  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٦٤  مُدْهَامَّتَانِ

64  Deep green.

٦٥  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

65  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٦٦  فِيهِمَا عَيْنَانِ نَضَّاخَتَانِ

66  In them are two gushing springs.

٦٧  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

67  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٦٨  فِيهِمَا فَاكِهَةٌ وَنَخْلٌ وَرُمَّانٌ

68  In them are fruits, and date-palms, and pomegranates.

٦٩  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

69  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٧٠  فِيهِنَّ خَيْرَاتٌ حِسَانٌ

70  In them are good and beautiful ones.

٧١  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

71  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٧٢  حُورٌ مَقْصُورَاتٌ فِي الْخِيَامِ

72  Companions, secluded in the tents.

٧٣  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

73  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٧٤  لَمْ يَطْمِثْهُنَّ إِنْسٌ قَبْلَهُمْ وَلَا جَانٌّ

74  Whom no human has touched before, nor jinn.

٧٥  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

75  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٧٦  مُتَّكِئِينَ عَلَىٰ رَفْرَفٍ خُضْرٍ وَعَبْقَرِيٍّ حِسَانٍ

76  Reclining on green cushions, and exquisite carpets.

٧٧  فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ

77  So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?

٧٨  تَبَارَكَ اسْمُ رَبِّكَ ذِي الْجَلَالِ وَالْإِكْرَامِ

78  Blessed be the name of your Lord, Full of Majesty and Splendor.