
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالصَّافَّاتِ صَفًّا

1  By the aligners aligning.

٢  فَالزَّاجِرَاتِ زَجْرًا

2  And the drivers driving.

٣  فَالتَّالِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا

3  And the reciters of the Reminder.

٤  إِنَّ إِلَٰهَكُمْ لَوَاحِدٌ

4  Your God is indeed One.

٥  رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا وَرَبُّ الْمَشَارِقِ

5  Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them; and Lord of the Easts.

٦  إِنَّا زَيَّنَّا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا بِزِينَةٍ الْكَوَاكِبِ

6  We have adorned the lower heaven with the beauty of the planets.

٧  وَحِفْظًا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ مَارِدٍ

7  And guarded it against every defiant devil.

٨  لَا يَسَّمَّعُونَ إِلَى الْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ وَيُقْذَفُونَ مِنْ كُلِّ جَانِبٍ

8  They cannot eavesdrop on the Supernal Elite, for they get bombarded from every side.

٩  دُحُورًا ۖ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ وَاصِبٌ

9  Repelled-they will have a lingering torment.

١٠  إِلَّا مَنْ خَطِفَ الْخَطْفَةَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ ثَاقِبٌ

10  Except for him who snatches a fragment-he gets pursued by a piercing projectile.

١١  فَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمْ مَنْ خَلَقْنَا ۚ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُمْ مِنْ طِينٍ لَازِبٍ

11  Inquire of them, "Are they more difficult to create, or the others We created?" We created them from sticky clay.

١٢  بَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخَرُونَ

12  But you wonder, and they ridicule.

١٣  وَإِذَا ذُكِّرُوا لَا يَذْكُرُونَ

13  And when reminded, they pay no attention.

١٤  وَإِذَا رَأَوْا آيَةً يَسْتَسْخِرُونَ

14  And when they see a sign, they ridicule.

١٥  وَقَالُوا إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ

15  And they say, "This is nothing but plain magic.

١٦  أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ

16  When we have died and become dust and bones, shall we be resurrected?

١٧  أَوَآبَاؤُنَا الْأَوَّلُونَ

17  And our ancestors of old?"

١٨  قُلْ نَعَمْ وَأَنْتُمْ دَاخِرُونَ

18  Say, "Yes indeed, and you will be totally subdued."

١٩  فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فَإِذَا هُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ

19  It will be a single nudge, and they will be staring.

٢٠  وَقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا هَٰذَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ

20  They will say, "Woe to us. This is the Day of Judgment."

٢١  هَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ

21  "This is the Day of Separation which you used to deny.

٢٢  احْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَمَا كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ

22  Gather those who did wrong, and their mates, and what they used to worship.

٢٣  مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ فَاهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ الْجَحِيمِ

23  Besides God, and lead them to the way to Hell.

٢٤  وَقِفُوهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ مَسْئُولُون
َ
24  And stop them. They are to be questioned."

٢٥  مَا لَكُمْ لَا تَنَاصَرُونَ

25  What is the matter with you? Why do you not help one another?

٢٦  بَلْ هُمُ الْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ

26  In fact, on that Day, they will be submissive.

٢٧  وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

27  They will come to one another, questioning one another.

٢٨  قَالُوا إِنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ الْيَمِينِ

28  They will say, "You used to come at us from the right."

٢٩  قَالُوا بَلْ لَمْ تَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ

29  They will say, "You yourselves were not believers.

٣٠  وَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ ۖ بَلْ كُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا طَاغِينَ

30  We had no authority over you. You yourselves were rebellious people.

٣١  فَحَقَّ عَلَيْنَا قَوْلُ رَبِّنَا ۖ إِنَّا لَذَائِقُونَ

31  The Word of our Lord has been realized against us. We are tasting it.

٣٢  فَأَغْوَيْنَاكُمْ إِنَّا كُنَّا غَاوِينَ

32  We seduced you. We were seducers."

٣٣  فَإِنَّهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ فِي الْعَذَابِ مُشْتَرِكُونَ

33  On that Day, they will share in the punishment.

٣٤  إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِالْمُجْرِمِينَ

34  Thus We deal with the sinners.

٣٥  إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ

35  When it was said to them, "There is no god except God," they grew arrogant.

٣٦  وَيَقُولُونَ أَئِنَّا لَتَارِكُو آلِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَجْنُونٍ

36  And said, "Are we to abandon our gods for a mad poet?"

٣٧  بَلْ جَاءَ بِالْحَقِّ وَصَدَّقَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

37  In fact, he came with the truth, and he confirmed the messengers.

٣٨  إِنَّكُمْ لَذَائِقُو الْعَذَابِ الْأَلِيمِ

38  Most assuredly, you will taste the painful punishment.

٣٩  وَمَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ

39  And you will be repaid only for what you used to do.

٤٠  إِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

40  Except for God's sincere servants.

٤١  أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ رِزْقٌ مَعْلُومٌ

41  For them is a known provision.

٤٢  فَوَاكِهُ ۖ وَهُمْ مُكْرَمُونَ

42  Fruits; and they will be honored.

٤٣  فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ

43  In the Gardens of Bliss.

٤٤  عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مُتَقَابِلِينَ

44  On furnishings, facing one another.

٤٥  يُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ

45  They will be offered a cup of pure drink.

٤٦  بَيْضَاءَ لَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ

46  White; a delight to those who drink.

٤٧  لَا فِيهَا غَوْلٌ وَلَا هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنْزَفُونَ

47  Never polluted, and never intoxicating.

٤٨  وَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ عِينٌ

48  With them will be bashful women with lovely eyes.

٤٩  كَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ

49  As if they were closely guarded pearls.

٥٠  فَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

50  Then they will approach one another, questioning.

٥١  قَالَ قَائِلٌ مِنْهُمْ إِنِّي كَانَ لِي قَرِينٌ

51  One of them will say, "I used to have a friend.

٥٢  يَقُولُ أَإِنَّكَ لَمِنَ الْمُصَدِّقِينَ

52  Who used to say, "Are you of those who believe?

٥٣  أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَدِينُونَ

53  That after we die and become dust and bones, we will be called to account?"

٥٤  قَالَ هَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُطَّلِعُونَ

54  He will say, "Will you have a look?"

٥٥  فَاطَّلَعَ فَرَآهُ فِي سَوَاءِ الْجَحِيمِ

55  He will look, and will see him in the pit of Hell.

٥٦  قَالَ تَاللَّهِ إِنْ كِدْتَ لَتُرْدِينِ

56  He will say, "By God, you almost ruined me.

٥٧  وَلَوْلَا نِعْمَةُ رَبِّي لَكُنْتُ مِنَ الْمُحْضَرِينَ

57  Were it not for the grace of my Lord, I would have been among the arraigned."

٥٨  أَفَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَيِّتِينَ

58  "We will not die.

٥٩  إِلَّا مَوْتَتَنَا الْأُولَىٰ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ

59  Except for our first death, and we will not be punished."

٦٠  إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ

60  This is the supreme triumph.

٦١  لِمِثْلِ هَٰذَا فَلْيَعْمَلِ الْعَامِلُونَ

61  For the like of this let the workers work.

٦٢  أَذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ نُزُلًا أَمْ شَجَرَةُ الزَّقُّومِ

62  Is this a better hospitality, or the Tree of Bitterness?

٦٣  إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهَا فِتْنَةً لِلظَّالِمِينَ

63  We made it an ordeal for the unjust.

٦٤  إِنَّهَا شَجَرَةٌ تَخْرُجُ فِي أَصْلِ الْجَحِيمِ

64  It is a tree that grows from the bottom of Hell.

٦٥  طَلْعُهَا كَأَنَّهُ رُءُوسُ الشَّيَاطِينِ

65  Its fruits are like the devils' heads.

٦٦  فَإِنَّهُمْ لَآكِلُونَ مِنْهَا فَمَالِئُونَ مِنْهَا الْبُطُونَ

66  They will eat from it, and fill their bellies with it.

٦٧  ثُمَّ إِنَّ لَهُمْ عَلَيْهَا لَشَوْبًا مِنْ حَمِيمٍ

67  Then, on top of it, they will have a brew of boiling liquid.

٦٨  ثُمَّ إِنَّ مَرْجِعَهُمْ لَإِلَى الْجَحِيمِ

68  Then their return will be to the Blaze.

٦٩  إِنَّهُمْ أَلْفَوْا آبَاءَهُمْ ضَالِّينَ

69  They had found their parents astray.

٧٠  فَهُمْ عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ يُهْرَعُونَ

70  And rushed along in their footsteps.

٧١  وَلَقَدْ ضَلَّ قَبْلَهُمْ أَكْثَرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

71  And most of the ancients before them went astray.

٧٢  وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا فِيهِمْ مُنْذِرِينَ

72  Even though We sent messengers to warn them.

٧٣  فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ

73  So observe the end of those who were warned.

٧٤  إِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

74  Except for the sincere servants of God.

٧٥  وَلَقَدْ نَادَانَا نُوحٌ فَلَنِعْمَ الْمُجِيبُونَ

75  And Noah called out to Us, and We are the Best of responders.

٧٦  وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ مِنَ الْكَرْبِ الْعَظِيمِ

76  And We saved him and his family from the great calamity.

٧٧  وَجَعَلْنَا ذُرِّيَّتَهُ هُمُ الْبَاقِينَ

77  And We made his descendants the survivors.

٧٨  وَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الْآخِرِينَ

78  And We left mention of him among those who succeeded.

٧٩  سَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ نُوحٍ فِي الْعَالَمِينَ

79  Peace be upon Noah among all people.

٨٠  إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ

80  We thus reward the righteous.

٨١  إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

81  He was one of Our believing servants.

٨٢  ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا الْآخَرِينَ

82  Then We drowned the others.

٨٣  وَإِنَّ مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ لَإِبْرَاهِيمَ

83  Of his kind was Abraham.

٨٤  إِذْ جَاءَ رَبَّهُ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ

84  When he came to his Lord with a sound heart.

٨٥  إِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَاذَا تَعْبُدُونَ

85  He said to his father and his people, "What are you worshiping?

٨٦  أَئِفْكًا آلِهَةً دُونَ اللَّهِ تُرِيدُونَ

86  Is it falsified gods, instead of God, that you want?

٨٧  فَمَا ظَنُّكُمْ بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

87  So what is your opinion about the Lord of the Worlds?"

٨٨  فَنَظَرَ نَظْرَةً فِي النُّجُومِ

88  Then he took a glance at the stars.

٨٩  فَقَالَ إِنِّي سَقِيمٌ

89  And said, "I am sick."

٩٠  فَتَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ مُدْبِرِينَ

90  But they turned their backs on him, and went away.

٩١  فَرَاغَ إِلَىٰ آلِهَتِهِمْ فَقَالَ أَلَا تَأْكُلُونَ

91  Then he turned to their gods, and said, "will you not eat?

٩٢  مَا لَكُمْ لَا تَنْطِقُونَ

92  What is it with you, that you do not speak?"

٩٣  فَرَاغَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضَرْبًا بِالْيَمِينِ

93  Then he turned on them, striking with his right hand.

٩٤  فَأَقْبَلُوا إِلَيْهِ يَزِفُّونَ

94  And they came running towards him.

٩٥  قَالَ أَتَعْبُدُونَ مَا تَنْحِتُونَ

95  He said, "Do you worship what you carve?

٩٦  وَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا تَعْمَلُونَ

96  When God created you, and what you manufacture?"

٩٧  قَالُوا ابْنُوا لَهُ بُنْيَانًا فَأَلْقُوهُ فِي الْجَحِيمِ

97  They said, "Build a pyre for him, and throw him into the furnace."

٩٨  فَأَرَادُوا بِهِ كَيْدًا فَجَعَلْنَاهُمُ الْأَسْفَلِينَ

98  They wished him ill, but We made them the losers.

٩٩  وَقَالَ إِنِّي ذَاهِبٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ

99   He said, "I am going towards my Lord, and He will guide me."

١٠٠  رَبِّ هَبْ لِي مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ

100  "My Lord, give me one of the righteous."

١٠١  فَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِغُلَامٍ حَلِيمٍ

101  So We gave him good news of a clement boy.

١٠٢  فَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ قَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ إِنِّي أَرَىٰ فِي الْمَنَامِ أَنِّي أَذْبَحُكَ فَانْظُرْ مَاذَا تَرَىٰ ۚ قَالَ يَا أَبَتِ افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ ۖ سَتَجِدُنِي إِنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الصَّابِرِينَ

102  Then, when he was old enough to accompany him, he said, "O My son, I see in a dream that I am sacrificing you; see what you think." He said, "O my Father, do as you are commanded; you will find me, God willing, one of the steadfast."

١٠٣  فَلَمَّا أَسْلَمَا وَتَلَّهُ لِلْجَبِينِ

103  Then, when they had submitted, and he put his forehead down.

١٠٤  وَنَادَيْنَاهُ أَنْ يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ

104  We called out to him, "O Abraham!

١٠٥  قَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَا ۚ إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ

105  You have fulfilled the vision." Thus We reward the doers of good.

١٠٦  إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْبَلَاءُ الْمُبِينُ

106  This was certainly an evident test.

١٠٧  وَفَدَيْنَاهُ بِذِبْحٍ عَظِيمٍ

107  And We redeemed him with a great sacrifice.

١٠٨  وَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الْآخِرِينَ

108  And We left with him for later generations.

١٠٩  سَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ

109  Peace be upon Abraham.

١١٠  كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ

110  Thus We reward the doers of good.

١١١  إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

111  He was one of Our believing servants.

١١٢  وَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِإِسْحَاقَ نَبِيًّا مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ

112  And We gave him good news of Isaac, a prophet, one of the righteous.

١١٣  وَبَارَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَىٰ إِسْحَاقَ ۚ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِهِمَا مُحْسِنٌ وَظَالِمٌ لِنَفْسِهِ مُبِينٌ

113  And We blessed him, and Isaac. But among their descendants are some who are righteous, and some who are clearly unjust to themselves.

١١٤  وَلَقَدْ مَنَنَّا عَلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ

114  And We blessed Moses and Aaron.

١١٥  وَنَجَّيْنَاهُمَا وَقَوْمَهُمَا مِنَ الْكَرْبِ الْعَظِيمِ

115  And We delivered them and their people from the terrible disaster.

١١٦  وَنَصَرْنَاهُمْ فَكَانُوا هُمُ الْغَالِبِينَ

116  And We supported them, and so they were the victors.

١١٧  وَآتَيْنَاهُمَا الْكِتَابَ الْمُسْتَبِينَ

117  And We gave them the Clarifying Scripture.

١١٨  وَهَدَيْنَاهُمَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ

118  And We guided them upon the straight path.

١١٩  وَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِمَا فِي الْآخِرِينَ

119  And We left with them for later generations.

١٢٠  سَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ

120  Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.

١٢١  إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ

121  Thus We reward the righteous.

١٢٢  إِنَّهُمَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

122  They were of Our believing servants.

١٢٣  وَإِنَّ إِلْيَاسَ لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

123  Also Elijah was one of the messengers.

١٢٤  إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

124  He said to his people, "Do you not fear?

١٢٥  أَتَدْعُونَ بَعْلًا وَتَذَرُونَ أَحْسَنَ الْخَالِقِينَ

125  Do you call on Baal, and forsake the Best of creators?

١٢٦  اللَّهَ رَبَّكُمْ وَرَبَّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

126  God is your Lord, and the Lord of your ancestors."

١٢٧  فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَإِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ

127  But they called him a liar, and thus they will be brought forward.

١٢٨  إِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

128  Except for God's sincere servants.

١٢٩  وَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الْآخِرِينَ

129  And We left with him for later generations.

١٣٠  سَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ إِلْ يَاسِينَ

130  Peace be upon the House of Elijah.

١٣١  إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ

131  Thus We reward the virtuous.

١٣٢  إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

132  He was one of Our believing servants.

١٣٣  وَإِنَّ لُوطًا لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

133  And Lot was one of the messengers.

١٣٤  إِذْ نَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ

134  We saved him and his family, all of them.

١٣٥  إِلَّا عَجُوزًا فِي الْغَابِرِينَ

135  Except for an old woman who lagged behind.

١٣٦  ثُمَّ دَمَّرْنَا الْآخَرِينَ

136  Then We annihilated the others.

١٣٧  وَإِنَّكُمْ لَتَمُرُّونَ عَلَيْهِمْ مُصْبِحِينَ

137  You pass by them in the morning.

١٣٨  وَبِاللَّيْلِ ۗ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ

138  And at night. Do you not understand?

١٣٩  وَإِنَّ يُونُسَ لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

139  And Jonah was one of the messengers.

١٤٠  إِذْ أَبَقَ إِلَى الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ

140  When he fled to the laden boat.

١٤١  فَسَاهَمَ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْمُدْحَضِينَ

141  He gambled and lost.

١٤٢  فَالْتَقَمَهُ الْحُوتُ وَهُوَ مُلِيمٌ

142  Then the fish swallowed him, and he was to blame.

١٤٣  فَلَوْلَا أَنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُسَبِّحِينَ

143  Had he not been one of those who praised.

١٤٤  لَلَبِثَ فِي بَطْنِهِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ

144  He would have stayed in its belly until the Day they are raised.

١٤٥  فَنَبَذْنَاهُ بِالْعَرَاءِ وَهُوَ سَقِيمٌ

145  Then We threw him into the wilderness, and he was sick.

١٤٦  وَأَنْبَتْنَا عَلَيْهِ شَجَرَةً مِنْ يَقْطِينٍ

146  And We made a gourd tree grow over him.

١٤٧  وَأَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَىٰ مِائَةِ أَلْفٍ أَوْ يَزِيدُونَ

147  Then We sent him to a hundred thousand, or more.

١٤٨  فَآمَنُوا فَمَتَّعْنَاهُمْ إِلَىٰ حِينٍ

148  And they believed, so We gave them enjoyment for a while.

١٤٩  فَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَلِرَبِّكَ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَهُمُ الْبَنُونَ

149  Ask them, "Are the daughters for your Lord, while for them the sons?"

١٥٠  أَمْ خَلَقْنَا الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِنَاثًا وَهُمْ شَاهِدُونَ

150  Or did We create the angels females, as they witnessed?"

١٥١  أَلَا إِنَّهُمْ مِنْ إِفْكِهِمْ لَيَقُولُونَ

151  No indeed! It is one of their lies when they say.

١٥٢  وَلَدَ اللَّهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ

152  "God has begotten." They are indeed lying.

١٥٣  أَصْطَفَى الْبَنَاتِ عَلَى الْبَنِينَ

153  So He preferred girls over boys?

١٥٤  مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ

154  What is the matter with you? How do you judge?

١٥٥  أَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ

155  Will you not reflect?

١٥٦  أَمْ لَكُمْ سُلْطَانٌ مُبِينٌ

156  Or do you have some clear proof?

١٥٧  فَأْتُوا بِكِتَابِكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ

157  Then bring your book, if you are telling the truth.

١٥٨  وَجَعَلُوا بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْجِنَّةِ نَسَبًا ۚ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمَتِ الْجِنَّةُ إِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ

158  And they invented a relationship between Him and the jinn. But the jinn know that they will be arraigned.

١٥٩  سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ

159  God be glorified, far above what they allege.

١٦٠  إِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

160  Except for God's sincere servants.

١٦١  فَإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ

161  Surely, you and what you serve.

١٦٢  مَا أَنْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ بِفَاتِنِينَ

162  Cannot seduce away from Him.

١٦٣  إِلَّا مَنْ هُوَ صَالِ الْجَحِيمِ

163  Except for he who will be roasting in Hell.

١٦٤  وَمَا مِنَّا إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ

164  "There is not one of us but has an assigned position.

١٦٥  وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الصَّافُّونَ

165  And we are the arrangers.

١٦٦  وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْمُسَبِّحُونَ

166  And we are the glorifiers."

١٦٧  وَإِنْ كَانُوا لَيَقُولُونَ

167  Even though they used to say.

١٦٨  لَوْ أَنَّ عِنْدَنَا ذِكْرًا مِنَ الْأَوَّلِينَ

168  "Had we received advice from the ancients.

١٦٩  لَكُنَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

169  We would have been God's faithful servants."

١٧٠  فَكَفَرُوا بِهِ ۖ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ

170  But they rejected it, so they will find out.

١٧١  وَلَقَدْ سَبَقَتْ كَلِمَتُنَا لِعِبَادِنَا الْمُرْسَلِينَ

171  Our Word has already gone out to our servant messengers.

١٧٢  إِنَّهُمْ لَهُمُ الْمَنْصُورُونَ

172  It is they who will be supported.

١٧٣  وَإِنَّ جُنْدَنَا لَهُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ

173  And Our troops will be the victors.

١٧٤  فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ

174  So disregard them for a while.

١٧٥  وَأَبْصِرْهُمْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ

175  And watch them-they will soon see.

١٧٦  أَفَبِعَذَابِنَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونَ

176  Are they seeking to hasten Our punishment?

١٧٧  فَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ

177  When it descends into their yard, miserable will be the morning of those forewarned.

١٧٨  وَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ

178  So avoid them for a while.

١٧٩  وَأَبْصِرْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ

179  And watch-they will soon see.

١٨٠  سُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ

180  Exalted be your Lord, the Lord of Glory, beyond their allegations.

١٨١  وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى الْمُرْسَلِينَ

181  And peace be upon the messengers.

١٨٢  وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

182  And praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.