
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  طسم

1  Ta, Seen, Meem.

٢  تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ

2  These are the Verses of the Clarifying Book.

٣  لَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَفْسَكَ أَلَّا يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ

3  Perhaps you will destroy yourself with grief, because they do not become believers.

٤  إِنْ نَشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ

4  If We will, We can send down upon them a sign from heaven, at which their necks will stay bent in humility.

٥  وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ ذِكْرٍ مِنَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ مُحْدَثٍ إِلَّا كَانُوا عَنْهُ مُعْرِضِينَ

5  No fresh reminder comes to them from the Most Merciful, but they turn their backs at it.

٦  فَقَدْ كَذَّبُوا فَسَيَأْتِيهِمْ أَنْبَاءُ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ

6  They have denied the truth, but soon will come to them the news of what they ridiculed.

٧  أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الْأَرْضِ كَمْ أَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ زَوْجٍ كَرِيمٍ

7  Have they not seen the earth, and how many beautiful pairs We produced therein?

٨  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

8  Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

٩  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

9  Most surely, your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٠  وَإِذْ نَادَىٰ رَبُّكَ مُوسَىٰ أَنِ ائْتِ الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ

10  Your Lord called to Moses, "Go to the tyrannical people.

١١  قَوْمَ فِرْعَوْنَ ۚ أَلَا يَتَّقُونَ

11  The people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear?"

١٢  قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي أَخَافُ أَنْ يُكَذِّبُونِ

12  He said, "My Lord, I fear they will reject me.

١٣  وَيَضِيقُ صَدْرِي وَلَا يَنْطَلِقُ لِسَانِي فَأَرْسِلْ إِلَىٰ هَارُونَ

13  And I become stressed, and my tongue is not fluent, so send Aaron too.

١٤  وَلَهُمْ عَلَيَّ ذَنْبٌ فَأَخَافُ أَنْ يَقْتُلُونِ

14  And they have a charge against me, so I fear they will kill me."

١٥  قَالَ كَلَّا ۖ فَاذْهَبَا بِآيَاتِنَا ۖ إِنَّا مَعَكُمْ مُسْتَمِعُونَ

15  He said, "No. Go, both of you, with Our proofs. We will be with you, listening.

١٦  فَأْتِيَا فِرْعَوْنَ فَقُولَا إِنَّا رَسُولُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

16  Go to Pharaoh, and say, 'We are the Messengers of the Lord of the Worlds.

١٧  أَنْ أَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ

17  Let the Children of Israel go with us.'"

١٨  قَالَ أَلَمْ نُرَبِّكَ فِينَا وَلِيدًا وَلَبِثْتَ فِينَا مِنْ عُمُرِكَ سِنِينَ

18  He said, "Did we not raise you among us as a child, and you stayed among us for many of your years?

١٩  وَفَعَلْتَ فَعْلَتَكَ الَّتِي فَعَلْتَ وَأَنْتَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ

19  And you committed that deed you committed, and you were ungrateful."

٢٠  قَالَ فَعَلْتُهَا إِذًا وَأَنَا مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ

20  He said, "I did it then, when I was of those astray.

٢١  فَفَرَرْتُ مِنْكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

21  And I fled from you when I feared you; but my Lord gave me wisdom, and made me one of the messengers.

٢٢  وَتِلْكَ نِعْمَةٌ تَمُنُّهَا عَلَيَّ أَنْ عَبَّدْتَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ

22  Is that the favor you taunt me with, although you have enslaved the Children of Israel?"

٢٣  قَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَا رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ

23  Pharaoh said, "And what is the Lord of the Worlds?"

٢٤  قَالَ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُوقِنِينَ

24  He said, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them, if you are aware."

٢٥  قَالَ لِمَنْ حَوْلَهُ أَلَا تَسْتَمِعُونَ

25  He said to those around him, "Do you not hear?"

٢٦  قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ وَرَبُّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

26  He said, "Your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors of old."

٢٧  قَالَ إِنَّ رَسُولَكُمُ الَّذِي أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ لَمَجْنُونٌ

27  He said, "This messenger of yours, who is sent to you, is crazy."

٢٨  قَالَ رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ

28  He said, "Lord of the East and the West, and everything between them, if you understand."

٢٩  قَالَ لَئِنِ اتَّخَذْتَ إِلَٰهًا غَيْرِي لَأَجْعَلَنَّكَ مِنَ الْمَسْجُونِينَ

29  He said, "If you accept any god other than me, I will make you a prisoner."

٣٠  قَالَ أَوَلَوْ جِئْتُكَ بِشَيْءٍ مُبِينٍ

30  He said, "What if I bring you something convincing?"

٣١  قَالَ فَأْتِ بِهِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ

31  He said, "Bring it, if you are being truthful."

٣٢  فَأَلْقَىٰ عَصَاهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ ثُعْبَانٌ مُبِينٌ

32  So he cast his staff; and it was a serpent, plain to see.

٣٣  وَنَزَعَ يَدَهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ بَيْضَاءُ لِلنَّاظِرِينَ

33  And he pulled his hand; and it was white, for all to see.

٣٤  قَالَ لِلْمَلَإِ حَوْلَهُ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَسَاحِرٌ عَلِيمٌ

34  He said to the dignitaries around him, "This is a skilled magician.

٣٥  يُرِيدُ أَنْ يُخْرِجَكُمْ مِنْ أَرْضِكُمْ بِسِحْرِهِ فَمَاذَا تَأْمُرُونَ

35  He intends to drive you out of your land with his magic, so what do you recommend?"

٣٦  قَالُوا أَرْجِهْ وَأَخَاهُ وَابْعَثْ فِي الْمَدَائِنِ حَاشِرِينَ

36  They said, "Delay him and his brother, and send recruiters to the cities.

٣٧  يَأْتُوكَ بِكُلِّ سَحَّارٍ عَلِيمٍ

37  To bring you every experienced magician."

٣٨  فَجُمِعَ السَّحَرَةُ لِمِيقَاتِ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ

38  So the magicians were gathered for the appointment on a specified day.

٣٩  وَقِيلَ لِلنَّاسِ هَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُجْتَمِعُونَ

39  And it was said to the people, "Are you all gathered?

٤٠  لَعَلَّنَا نَتَّبِعُ السَّحَرَةَ إِنْ كَانُوا هُمُ الْغَالِبِينَ

40  That we may follow the magicians, if they are the winners."

٤١  فَلَمَّا جَاءَ السَّحَرَةُ قَالُوا لِفِرْعَوْنَ أَئِنَّ لَنَا لَأَجْرًا إِنْ كُنَّا نَحْنُ الْغَالِبِينَ

41  When the magicians arrived, they said to Pharaoh, "Is there a reward for us, if we are the winners?"

٤٢  قَالَ نَعَمْ وَإِنَّكُمْ إِذًا لَمِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ

42  He said, "Yes, and you will be among those favored."

٤٣  قَالَ لَهُمْ مُوسَىٰ أَلْقُوا مَا أَنْتُمْ مُلْقُونَ

43  Moses said to them, "Present what you intend to present."

٤٤  فَأَلْقَوْا حِبَالَهُمْ وَعِصِيَّهُمْ وَقَالُوا بِعِزَّةِ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْغَالِبُونَ

44  So they threw their ropes and their sticks, and said, "By the majesty of Pharaoh, we will be the winners."

٤٥  فَأَلْقَىٰ مُوسَىٰ عَصَاهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ تَلْقَفُ مَا يَأْفِكُونَ

45  Then Moses threw his staff, and behold, it began swallowing their trickery.

٤٦  فَأُلْقِيَ السَّحَرَةُ سَاجِدِينَ

46  And the magicians fell down prostrating.

٤٧  قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

47  They said, "We have believed in the Lord of the Worlds.

٤٨  رَبِّ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ

48  The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

٤٩  قَالَ آمَنْتُمْ لَهُ قَبْلَ أَنْ آذَنَ لَكُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُ لَكَبِيرُكُمُ الَّذِي عَلَّمَكُمُ السِّحْرَ فَلَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ ۚ لَأُقَطِّعَنَّ أَيْدِيَكُمْ وَأَرْجُلَكُمْ مِنْ خِلَافٍ وَلَأُصَلِّبَنَّكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

49  He said, "Did you believe in Him before I have given you permission? He must be your chief, who taught you magic. You will soon know. I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will crucify you all."

٥٠  قَالُوا لَا ضَيْرَ ۖ إِنَّا إِلَىٰ رَبِّنَا مُنْقَلِبُونَ

50  They said, "No problem. To our Lord we will return.

٥١  إِنَّا نَطْمَعُ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ لَنَا رَبُّنَا خَطَايَانَا أَنْ كُنَّا أَوَّلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

51  We are eager for our Lord to forgive us our sins, since we are the first of the believers."

٥٢  وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنْ أَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي إِنَّكُمْ مُتَّبَعُونَ

52  And We inspired Moses: "Travel with My servants by night. You will be followed."

٥٣  فَأَرْسَلَ فِرْعَوْنُ فِي الْمَدَائِنِ حَاشِرِينَ

53  Pharaoh sent heralds to the cities.

٥٤  إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَشِرْذِمَةٌ قَلِيلُونَ

54  "These are a small gang.

٥٥  وَإِنَّهُمْ لَنَا لَغَائِظُونَ

55  And they are enraging us.

٥٦  وَإِنَّا لَجَمِيعٌ حَاذِرُونَ

56  But we are a vigilant multitude."

٥٧  فَأَخْرَجْنَاهُمْ مِنْ جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

57  So We drove them out of gardens and springs.

٥٨  وَكُنُوزٍ وَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ

58  And treasures and noble dwellings.

٥٩  كَذَٰلِكَ وَأَوْرَثْنَاهَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ

59  So it was. And We made the Children of Israel inherit them.

٦٠  فَأَتْبَعُوهُمْ مُشْرِقِينَ

60  And they pursued them at sunrise.

٦١  فَلَمَّا تَرَاءَى الْجَمْعَانِ قَالَ أَصْحَابُ مُوسَىٰ إِنَّا لَمُدْرَكُونَ

61  When the two groups sighted each other, the followers of Moses said, "We are being overtaken."

٦٢  قَالَ كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّ مَعِيَ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ

62  He said, "No; my Lord is with me, He will guide me."

٦٣  فَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنِ اضْرِبْ بِعَصَاكَ الْبَحْرَ ۖ فَانْفَلَقَ فَكَانَ كُلُّ فِرْقٍ كَالطَّوْدِ الْعَظِيمِ

63  We inspired Moses: "Strike the sea with your staff." Whereupon it parted, and each part was like a huge hill.

٦٤  وَأَزْلَفْنَا ثَمَّ الْآخَرِينَ

64  And there We brought the others near.

٦٥  وَأَنْجَيْنَا مُوسَىٰ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ

65  And We saved Moses and those with him, all together.

٦٦  ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا الْآخَرِينَ

66  Then We drowned the others.

٦٧  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

67  In that there is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

٦٨  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

68  Surely, your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

٦٩  وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ

69  And relate to them the story of Abraham.

٧٠  إِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ

70  When he said to his father and his people, "What do you worship?"

٧١  قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ أَصْنَامًا فَنَظَلُّ لَهَا عَاكِفِينَ

71  They said, "We worship idols, and we remain devoted to them."

٧٢  قَالَ هَلْ يَسْمَعُونَكُمْ إِذْ تَدْعُونَ

72  He said, "Do they hear you when you pray?

٧٣  أَوْ يَنْفَعُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَضُرُّونَ

73  Or do they benefit you, or harm you?"

٧٤  قَالُوا بَلْ وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا كَذَٰلِكَ يَفْعَلُونَ

74  They said, "But we found our ancestors doing so."

٧٥  قَالَ أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْبُدُونَ

75  He said, "Have you considered what you worship.

٧٦  أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمُ الْأَقْدَمُونَ

76  You and your ancient ancestors?

٧٧  فَإِنَّهُمْ عَدُوٌّ لِي إِلَّا رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ

77  They are enemies to me, but not so the Lord of the Worlds.

٧٨  الَّذِي خَلَقَنِي فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ

78  He who created me, and guides me.

٧٩  وَالَّذِي هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِي وَيَسْقِينِ

79  He who feeds me, and waters me.

٨٠  وَإِذَا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ

80  And when I get sick, He heals me.

٨١  وَالَّذِي يُمِيتُنِي ثُمَّ يُحْيِينِ

81  He who makes me die, and then revives me.

٨٢  وَالَّذِي أَطْمَعُ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ لِي خَطِيئَتِي يَوْمَ الدِّينِ

82  He who, I hope, will forgive my sins on the Day of the Reckoning."

٨٣  رَبِّ هَبْ لِي حُكْمًا وَأَلْحِقْنِي بِالصَّالِحِينَ

83  "My Lord! Grant me wisdom, and include me with the righteous.

٨٤  وَاجْعَلْ لِي لِسَانَ صِدْقٍ فِي الْآخِرِينَ

84  And give me a reputation of truth among the others.

٨٥  وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ وَرَثَةِ جَنَّةِ النَّعِيمِ

85  And make me of the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss.

٨٦  وَاغْفِرْ لِأَبِي إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ

86  And forgive my father-he was one of the misguided.

٨٧  وَلَا تُخْزِنِي يَوْمَ يُبْعَثُونَ

87  And do not disgrace me on the Day they are resurrected.

٨٨  يَوْمَ لَا يَنْفَعُ مَالٌ وَلَا بَنُونَ

88  The Day when neither wealth nor children will help.

٨٩  إِلَّا مَنْ أَتَى اللَّهَ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ

89  Except for him who comes to God with a sound heart."

٩٠  وَأُزْلِفَتِ الْجَنَّةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ

90  And Paradise will be brought near for the righteous.

٩١  وَبُرِّزَتِ الْجَحِيمُ لِلْغَاوِينَ

91  And the Blaze will be displayed to the deviators.

٩٢  وَقِيلَ لَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْبُدُونَ

92  And it will be said to them, "Where are those you used to worship?"

٩٣  مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ هَلْ يَنْصُرُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَنْتَصِرُونَ

93  Besides God? Can they help you, or help themselves?"

٩٤  فَكُبْكِبُوا فِيهَا هُمْ وَالْغَاوُونَ

94  Then they will be toppled into it, together with the seducers.

٩٥  وَجُنُودُ إِبْلِيسَ أَجْمَعُونَ

95  And the soldiers of Satan, all of them.

٩٦  قَالُوا وَهُمْ فِيهَا يَخْتَصِمُونَ

96  They will say, as they feud in it.

٩٧  تَاللَّهِ إِنْ كُنَّا لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ

97  "By God, We were in evident error.

٩٨  إِذْ نُسَوِّيكُمْ بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

98  For equating you with the Lord of the Worlds.

٩٩  وَمَا أَضَلَّنَا إِلَّا الْمُجْرِمُونَ

99  No one misled us except the sinners.

١٠٠  فَمَا لَنَا مِنْ شَافِعِينَ

100  Now we have no intercessors.

١٠١  وَلَا صَدِيقٍ حَمِيمٍ

101  And no sincere friend.

١٠٢  فَلَوْ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً فَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

102  If only we could have another chance, we would be among the faithful."

١٠٣  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

103  Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

١٠٤  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

104  Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٠٥  كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

105  The people of Noah disbelieved the messengers.

١٠٦  إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ نُوحٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

106  Their brother Noah said to them, "Do you not fear?

١٠٧  إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ

107  I am to you a faithful messenger.

١٠٨  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

108  So fear God, and obey me.

١٠٩  وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

109  I ask of you no payment for this. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

١١٠  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

110  So fear God, and obey me."

١١١  قَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الْأَرْذَلُونَ

111  They said, "Shall we believe in you, when it is the lowliest who follow you?"

١١٢  قَالَ وَمَا عِلْمِي بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ

112  He said, "What do I know about what they do?

١١٣  إِنْ حِسَابُهُمْ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّي ۖ لَوْ تَشْعُرُونَ

113  Their account rests only with my Lord, if you have sense.

١١٤  وَمَا أَنَا بِطَارِدِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

114  And I am not about to drive away the believers.

١١٥  إِنْ أَنَا إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ

115  I am only a clear warner."

١١٦  قَالُوا لَئِنْ لَمْ تَنْتَهِ يَا نُوحُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمَرْجُومِينَ

116  They said, "If you do not refrain, O Noah, you will be stoned."

١١٧  قَالَ رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي كَذَّبُونِ

117  He said, "My Lord, my people have denied me.

١١٨  فَافْتَحْ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَهُمْ فَتْحًا وَنَجِّنِي وَمَنْ مَعِيَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

118  So judge between me and them decisively, and deliver me and the believers who are with me.

١١٩  فَأَنْجَيْنَاهُ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ

119  So We delivered him and those with him in the laden Ark.

١٢٠  ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا بَعْدُ الْبَاقِينَ

120  Then We drowned the rest.

١٢١  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

121  In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

١٢٢  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

122  Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٢٣  كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

123  Aad disbelieved the messengers.

١٢٤  إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ هُودٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

124  When their brother Hud said to them, "Do you not fear?

١٢٥  إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ

125  I am to you a faithful messenger.

١٢٦  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

126  So fear God, and obey me.

١٢٧  وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

127  I ask of you no payment for this. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

١٢٨  أَتَبْنُونَ بِكُلِّ رِيعٍ آيَةً تَعْبَثُونَ

128  Do you build a monument on every height for vanity's sake?

١٢٩  وَتَتَّخِذُونَ مَصَانِعَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَخْلُدُونَ

129  And you set up fortresses, hoping to live forever?

١٣٠  وَإِذَا بَطَشْتُمْ بَطَشْتُمْ جَبَّارِينَ

130  And when you strike, you strike mercilessly?

١٣١  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

131  So fear God, and obey me.

١٣٢  وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِي أَمَدَّكُمْ بِمَا تَعْلَمُونَ

132  And reverence Him, who supplied you with everything you know.

١٣٣  أَمَدَّكُمْ بِأَنْعَامٍ وَبَنِينَ

133  He supplied you with livestock and children.

١٣٤  وَجَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

134  And gardens and springs.

١٣٥  إِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ

135  I fear for you the punishment of an awesome Day."

١٣٦  قَالُوا سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْنَا أَوَعَظْتَ أَمْ لَمْ تَكُنْ مِنَ الْوَاعِظِينَ

136  They said, "It is the same for us, whether you lecture us, or do not lecture.

١٣٧  إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا خُلُقُ الْأَوَّلِينَ

137  This is nothing but morals of the ancients.

١٣٨  وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ

138  And we will not be punished."

١٣٩  فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

139  So they denied him, and We destroyed them. Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

١٤٠  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

140  Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٤١  كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

141  Thamood disbelieved the messengers.

١٤٢  إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ صَالِحٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

142  When their brother Saleh said to them, "Do you not fear?

١٤٣  إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ

143  I am to you a faithful messenger.

١٤٤  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

144  So fear God, and obey me.

١٤٥  وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

145  I ask of you no payment for it. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

١٤٦  أَتُتْرَكُونَ فِي مَا هَاهُنَا آمِنِينَ

146  Will you be left secure in what is here?

١٤٧  فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ

147  In gardens and springs?

١٤٨  وَزُرُوعٍ وَنَخْلٍ طَلْعُهَا هَضِيمٌ

148  And fields, and palm-trees whose fruits are delicious?

١٤٩  وَتَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا فَارِهِينَ

149  And you skillfully carve houses in the mountains?

١٥٠  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

150  So fear God, and obey me.

١٥١  وَلَا تُطِيعُوا أَمْرَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ

151  And do not obey the command of the extravagant.

١٥٢  الَّذِينَ يُفْسِدُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا يُصْلِحُونَ

152  Who spread turmoil on earth, and do not reform."

١٥٣  قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ

153  They said, "You are surely one of the bewitched.

١٥٤  مَا أَنْتَ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا فَأْتِ بِآيَةٍ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ

154  You are nothing but a man like us. So bring us a sign, if you are truthful.

١٥٥  قَالَ هَٰذِهِ نَاقَةٌ لَهَا شِرْبٌ وَلَكُمْ شِرْبُ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ

155  He said, "This is a she-camel; she has her turn of drinking, and you have your turn of drinking-on a specified day.

١٥٦  وَلَا تَمَسُّوهَا بِسُوءٍ فَيَأْخُذَكُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ

156  And do not touch her with harm, lest the punishment of a great day seizes you."

١٥٧  فَعَقَرُوهَا فَأَصْبَحُوا نَادِمِينَ

157  But they slaughtered her, and became full of remorse.

١٥٨  فَأَخَذَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ ۗ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

158  So the punishment overtook them. Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

١٥٩  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

159  Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٦٠  كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

160  The people of Lot disbelieved the messengers.

١٦١  إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ لُوطٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

161  When their brother Lot said to them, "Do you not fear?

١٦٢  إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ

162  I am to you a faithful messenger.

١٦٣  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

163  So fear God, and obey me.

١٦٤  وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

164  I ask of you no payment for it. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

١٦٥  أَتَأْتُونَ الذُّكْرَانَ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ

165  Do you approach the males of the world?

١٦٦  وَتَذَرُونَ مَا خَلَقَ لَكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ ۚ بَلْ أَنْتُمْ قَوْمٌ عَادُونَ

166  And forsake the wives your Lord created for you? Indeed, you are intrusive people."

١٦٧  قَالُوا لَئِنْ لَمْ تَنْتَهِ يَا لُوطُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُخْرَجِينَ

167  They said, "Unless you refrain, O Lot, you will be expelled."

١٦٨  قَالَ إِنِّي لِعَمَلِكُمْ مِنَ الْقَالِينَ

168  He said, "I certainly deplore your conduct."

١٦٩  رَبِّ نَجِّنِي وَأَهْلِي مِمَّا يَعْمَلُونَ

169  "My Lord, save me and my family from what they do."

١٧٠  فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ

170  So We saved him and his family, altogether.

١٧١  إِلَّا عَجُوزًا فِي الْغَابِرِينَ

171  Except for an old woman among those who tarried.

١٧٢  ثُمَّ دَمَّرْنَا الْآخَرِينَ

172  Then We destroyed the others.

١٧٣  وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ مَطَرًا ۖ فَسَاءَ مَطَرُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ

173  And We rained down on them a rain. Dreadful is the rain of those forewarned.

١٧٤  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

174  Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

١٧٥  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

175  Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٧٦  كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

176  The People of the Woods disbelieved the messengers.

١٧٧  إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ شُعَيْبٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ

177  When Shuaib said to them, "Do you not fear?

١٧٨  إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ

178  I am to you a trustworthy messenger.

١٧٩  فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ

179  So fear God, and obey me.

١٨٠  وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

180  I ask of you no payment for it. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

١٨١  أَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ وَلَا تَكُونُوا مِنَ الْمُخْسِرِينَ

181  Give full measure, and do not cheat.

١٨٢  وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ

182  And weigh with accurate scales.

١٨٣  وَلَا تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَاءَهُمْ وَلَا تَعْثَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ

183  And do not defraud people of their belongings, and do not work corruption in the land.

١٨٤  وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ وَالْجِبِلَّةَ الْأَوَّلِينَ

184  And fear Him who created you and the masses of old."

١٨٥  قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ

185  They said, "You are one of those bewitched.

١٨٦  وَمَا أَنْتَ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا وَإِنْ نَظُنُّكَ لَمِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ

186  And you are nothing but a man like us; and we think that you are a liar.

١٨٧  فَأَسْقِطْ عَلَيْنَا كِسَفًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ

187  So bring down on us pieces from the sky, if you are truthful."

١٨٨  قَالَ رَبِّي أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ

188  He said, "My Lord is Well Aware of what you do."

١٨٩  فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمِ الظُّلَّةِ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ

189  But they denied him. So the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them. It was the punishment of a great day.

١٩٠  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ

190  Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.

١٩١  وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ

191  Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.

١٩٢  وَإِنَّهُ لَتَنْزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ

192  It is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.

١٩٣  نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ

193  The Honest Spirit came down with it.

١٩٤  عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنْذِرِينَ

194  Upon your heart, that you may be one of the warners.

١٩٥  بِلِسَانٍ عَرَبِيٍّ مُبِينٍ

195  In a clear Arabic tongue.

١٩٦  وَإِنَّهُ لَفِي زُبُرِ الْأَوَّلِينَ

196  And it is in the scriptures of the ancients.

١٩٧  أَوَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُمْ آيَةً أَنْ يَعْلَمَهُ عُلَمَاءُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ

197  Is it not a sign for them that the scholars of the Children of Israel recognized it?

١٩٨  وَلَوْ نَزَّلْنَاهُ عَلَىٰ بَعْضِ الْأَعْجَمِينَ

198  Had We revealed it to one of the foreigners.

١٩٩  فَقَرَأَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ مُؤْمِنِينَ

199  And he had recited it to them, they still would not have believed in it.

٢٠٠  كَذَٰلِكَ سَلَكْنَاهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ

200  Thus We make it pass through the hearts of the guilty.

٢٠١  لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ

201  They will not believe in it until they witness the painful punishment.

٢٠٢  فَيَأْتِيَهُمْ بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ

202  It will come to them suddenly, while they are unaware.

٢٠٣  فَيَقُولُوا هَلْ نَحْنُ مُنْظَرُونَ

203  Then they will say, "Are we given any respite?"

٢٠٤  أَفَبِعَذَابِنَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونَ

204  Do they seek to hasten Our punishment?

٢٠٥  أَفَرَأَيْتَ إِنْ مَتَّعْنَاهُمْ سِنِينَ

205  Have you considered: if We let them enjoy themselves for some years.

٢٠٦  ثُمَّ جَاءَهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ

206  Then there comes to them what they were promised.

٢٠٧  مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يُمَتَّعُونَ

207  Of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments?

٢٠٨  وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ إِلَّا لَهَا مُنْذِرُونَ

208  Never did We destroy a town, but it had warners.

٢٠٩  ذِكْرَىٰ وَمَا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ

209  As a reminder-We are never unjust.

٢١٠  وَمَا تَنَزَّلَتْ بِهِ الشَّيَاطِينُ

210  It was not the devils that revealed it.

٢١١  وَمَا يَنْبَغِي لَهُمْ وَمَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ

211  It is not in their interests, nor in their power.

٢١٢  إِنَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّمْعِ لَمَعْزُولُونَ

212  They are barred from hearing.

٢١٣  فَلَا تَدْعُ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ فَتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُعَذَّبِينَ

213  So do not pray to another god with God, else you will be of those tormented.

٢١٤  وَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ

214  And warn your close relatives.

٢١٥  وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِمَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ

215  And lower your wing to those of the believers who follow you.

٢١٦  فَإِنْ عَصَوْكَ فَقُلْ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ

216  And if they disobey you, say, "I am innocent of what you do."

٢١٧  وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى الْعَزِيزِ الرَّحِيمِ

217  And put your trust in the Almighty, the Merciful.

٢١٨  الَّذِي يَرَاكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ

218  He Who sees you when you rise.

٢١٩  وَتَقَلُّبَكَ فِي السَّاجِدِينَ

219  And your devotions amidst the worshipers.

٢٢٠  إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ

220  He is indeed the Hearer, the Aware.

٢٢١  هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُمْ عَلَىٰ مَنْ تَنَزَّلُ الشَّيَاطِينُ

221  Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend?

٢٢٢  تَنَزَّلُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ أَفَّاكٍ أَثِيمٍ

222  They descend upon every sinful liar.

٢٢٣  يُلْقُونَ السَّمْعَ وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ كَاذِبُونَ

223  They give ear, and most of them are liars.

٢٢٤  وَالشُّعَرَاءُ يَتَّبِعُهُمُ الْغَاوُونَ

224  And as for the poets-the deviators follow them.

٢٢٥  أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّهُمْ فِي كُلِّ وَادٍ يَهِيمُونَ

225  Do you not see how they ramble in every style?

٢٢٦  وَأَنَّهُمْ يَقُولُونَ مَا لَا يَفْعَلُونَ

226  And how they say what they do not do?

٢٢٧  إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَذَكَرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا وَانْتَصَرُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا ۗ وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنْقَلَبٍ يَنْقَلِبُونَ

227  Except for those who believe, and do good deeds, and remember God frequently, and defend themselves after they are wronged. As for those who do wrong, they will know by what overturning they will be overturned.