
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  إِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ

1  When the sun is rolled up.

٢  وَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انْكَدَرَتْ

2  When the stars are dimmed.

٣  وَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ سُيِّرَتْ

3  When the mountains are set in motion.

٤  وَإِذَا الْعِشَارُ عُطِّلَتْ

4  When the relationships are suspended.

٥  وَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ

5  When the beasts are gathered.

٦  وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ

6  When the oceans are set aflame.

٧  وَإِذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوِّجَتْ

7  When the souls are paired.

٨  وَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ

8  When the girl, buried alive, is asked:

٩  بِأَيِّ ذَنْبٍ قُتِلَتْ

9  For what crime was she killed?

١٠  وَإِذَا الصُّحُفُ نُشِرَتْ

10  When the records are made public.

١١  وَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ كُشِطَتْ

11  When the sky is peeled away.

١٢  وَإِذَا الْجَحِيمُ سُعِّرَتْ

12  When the Fire is set ablaze.

١٣  وَإِذَا الْجَنَّةُ أُزْلِفَتْ

13  When Paradise is brought near.

١٤  عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَا أَحْضَرَتْ

14  Each soul will know what it has readied.

١٥  فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ

15  I swear by the galaxies.

١٦  الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ

16  Precisely running their courses.

١٧  وَاللَّيْلِ إِذَا عَسْعَسَ

17  And by the night as it recedes.

١٨  وَالصُّبْحِ إِذَا تَنَفَّسَ

18  And by the morn as it breathes.

١٩  إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ

19  This is the speech of a noble messenger.

٢٠  ذِي قُوَّةٍ عِنْدَ ذِي الْعَرْشِ مَكِينٍ

20  Endowed with power, eminent with the Lord of the Throne.

٢١  مُطَاعٍ ثَمَّ أَمِينٍ

21  Obeyed and honest.

٢٢  وَمَا صَاحِبُكُمْ بِمَجْنُونٍ

22  Your friend is not possessed.

٢٣  وَلَقَدْ رَآهُ بِالْأُفُقِ الْمُبِينِ

23  He saw him on the luminous horizon.

٢٤  وَمَا هُوَ عَلَى الْغَيْبِ بِضَنِينٍ

24  And He does not withhold knowledge of the Unseen.

٢٥  وَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَيْطَانٍ رَجِيمٍ

25  And it is not the word of an accursed devil.

٢٦  فَأَيْنَ تَذْهَبُونَ

26  So where are you heading?

٢٧  إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِلْعَالَمِينَ

27  It is only a Reminder to all mankind.

٢٨  لِمَنْ شَاءَ مِنْكُمْ أَنْ يَسْتَقِيمَ

28  To whoever of you wills to go straight.

٢٩  وَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ

29  But you cannot will, unless God wills-The Lord of the Worlds.