
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  وَالطُّورِ

1  By the Mount.

٢  وَكِتَابٍ مَسْطُورٍ

2  And a Book inscribed.

٣  فِي رَقٍّ مَنْشُورٍ

3  In a published scroll.

٤  وَالْبَيْتِ الْمَعْمُورِ

4  And the frequented House.

٥  وَالسَّقْفِ الْمَرْفُوعِ

5  And the elevated roof.

٦  وَالْبَحْرِ الْمَسْجُورِ

6  And the seething sea.

٧  إِنَّ عَذَابَ رَبِّكَ لَوَاقِعٌ

7  The punishment of your Lord is coming.

٨  مَا لَهُ مِنْ دَافِعٍ

8  There is nothing to avert it.

٩  يَوْمَ تَمُورُ السَّمَاءُ مَوْرًا

9  On the Day when the heaven sways in agitation.

١٠  وَتَسِيرُ الْجِبَالُ سَيْرًا

10  And the mountains go into motion.

١١  فَوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

11  Woe on that Day to the deniers.

١٢  الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي خَوْضٍ يَلْعَبُونَ

12  Those who play with speculation.

١٣  يَوْمَ يُدَعُّونَ إِلَىٰ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ دَعًّا

13  The Day when they are shoved into the Fire of Hell forcefully.

١٤  هَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ

14  "This is the Fire which you used to deny.

١٥  أَفَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا أَمْ أَنْتُمْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ

15  Is this magic, or do you not see?

١٦  اصْلَوْهَا فَاصْبِرُوا أَوْ لَا تَصْبِرُوا سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ إِنَّمَا تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ

16  Burn in it. Whether you are patient, or impatient, it is the same for you. You are only being repaid for what you used to do."

١٧  إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَعِيمٍ

17  But the righteous will be amid gardens and bliss.

١٨  فَاكِهِينَ بِمَا آتَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ وَوَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ

18  Enjoying what their Lord has given them, and their Lord has spared them the suffering of Hell.

١٩  كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ

19  Eat and drink happily, for what you used to do.

٢٠  مُتَّكِئِينَ عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مَصْفُوفَةٍ ۖ وَزَوَّجْنَاهُمْ بِحُورٍ عِينٍ

20  Relaxing on luxurious furnishings; and We will couple them with gorgeous spouses.

٢١  وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاتَّبَعَتْهُمْ ذُرِّيَّتُهُمْ بِإِيمَانٍ أَلْحَقْنَا بِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ وَمَا أَلَتْنَاهُمْ مِنْ عَمَلِهِمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ ۚ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ بِمَا كَسَبَ رَهِينٌ

21  Those who believed, and their offspring followed them in faith-We will unite them with their offspring, and We will not deprive them of any of their works. Every person is hostage to what he has earned.

٢٢  وَأَمْدَدْنَاهُمْ بِفَاكِهَةٍ وَلَحْمٍ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ

22  And We will supply them with fruit, and meat; such as they desire.

٢٣  يَتَنَازَعُونَ فِيهَا كَأْسًا لَا لَغْوٌ فِيهَا وَلَا تَأْثِيمٌ

23  They will exchange therein a cup; wherein is neither harm, nor sin.

٢٤  وَيَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ غِلْمَانٌ لَهُمْ كَأَنَّهُمْ لُؤْلُؤٌ مَكْنُونٌ

24  Serving them will be youths like hidden pearls.

٢٥  وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

25  And they will approach one another, inquiring.

٢٦  قَالُوا إِنَّا كُنَّا قَبْلُ فِي أَهْلِنَا مُشْفِقِينَ

26  They will say, "Before this, we were fearful for our families.

٢٧  فَمَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْنَا وَوَقَانَا عَذَابَ السَّمُومِ

27  But God blessed us, and spared us the agony of the Fiery Winds.

٢٨  إِنَّا كُنَّا مِنْ قَبْلُ نَدْعُوهُ ۖ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْبَرُّ الرَّحِيمُ

28  Before this, we used to pray to Him. He is the Good, the Compassionate."

٢٩  فَذَكِّرْ فَمَا أَنْتَ بِنِعْمَتِ رَبِّكَ بِكَاهِنٍ وَلَا مَجْنُونٍ

29  So remind. By the grace of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer, nor a madman.

٣٠  أَمْ يَقُولُونَ شَاعِرٌ نَتَرَبَّصُ بِهِ رَيْبَ الْمَنُونِ

30  Or do they say, "A poet-we await for him a calamity of time"?

٣١  قُلْ تَرَبَّصُوا فَإِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ الْمُتَرَبِّصِينَ

31  Say, "Go on waiting; I will be waiting with you."

٣٢  أَمْ تَأْمُرُهُمْ أَحْلَامُهُمْ بِهَٰذَا ۚ أَمْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ طَاغُونَ

32  Or is it that their dreams compel them to this? Or are they aggressive people?

٣٣  أَمْ يَقُولُونَ تَقَوَّلَهُ ۚ بَلْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ

33  Or do they say, "He made it up"? Rather, they do not believe.

٣٤  فَلْيَأْتُوا بِحَدِيثٍ مِثْلِهِ إِنْ كَانُوا صَادِقِينَ

34  So let them produce a discourse like it, if they are truthful.

٣٥  أَمْ خُلِقُوا مِنْ غَيْرِ شَيْءٍ أَمْ هُمُ الْخَالِقُونَ

35  Or were they created out of nothing? Or are they the creators?

٣٦  أَمْ خَلَقُوا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ ۚ بَلْ لَا يُوقِنُونَ

36  Or did they create the heavens and the earth? In fact, they are not certain.

٣٧  أَمْ عِنْدَهُمْ خَزَائِنُ رَبِّكَ أَمْ هُمُ الْمُصَيْطِرُونَ

37  Or do they possess the treasuries of your Lord? Or are they the controllers?

٣٨  أَمْ لَهُمْ سُلَّمٌ يَسْتَمِعُونَ فِيهِ ۖ فَلْيَأْتِ مُسْتَمِعُهُمْ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ

38  Or do they have a stairway by means of which they listen? Then let their listener produce a clear proof.

٣٩  أَمْ لَهُ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَكُمُ الْبَنُونَ

39  Or for Him the daughters, and for you the sons?

٤٠  أَمْ تَسْأَلُهُمْ أَجْرًا فَهُمْ مِنْ مَغْرَمٍ مُثْقَلُونَ

40  Or do you demand a payment from them, and they are burdened by debt?

٤١  أَمْ عِنْدَهُمُ الْغَيْبُ فَهُمْ يَكْتُبُونَ

41  Or do they know the future, and they are writing it down?

٤٢  أَمْ يُرِيدُونَ كَيْدًا ۖ فَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا هُمُ الْمَكِيدُونَ

42  Or are they planning a conspiracy? The conspiracy will befall the disbelievers.

٤٣  أَمْ لَهُمْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ ۚ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ

43  Or do they have a god besides God? God transcends what they associate.

٤٤  وَإِنْ يَرَوْا كِسْفًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ سَاقِطًا يَقُولُوا سَحَابٌ مَرْكُومٌ

44  Even if they were to see lumps of the sky falling down, they would say, "A mass of clouds."

٤٥  فَذَرْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ يُلَاقُوا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي فِيهِ يُصْعَقُونَ

45  So leave them until they meet their Day in which they will be stunned.

٤٦  يَوْمَ لَا يُغْنِي عَنْهُمْ كَيْدُهُمْ شَيْئًا وَلَا هُمْ يُنْصَرُونَ

46  The Day when their ploys will avail them nothing; and they will not be helped.

٤٧  وَإِنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا عَذَابًا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ

47  For those who do wrong, there is a punishment besides that; but most of them do not know.

٤٨  وَاصْبِرْ لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ فَإِنَّكَ بِأَعْيُنِنَا ۖ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ

48  So patiently await the decision of your Lord, for you are before Our Eyes; and proclaim the praises of your Lord when you arise.

٤٩  وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَإِدْبَارَ النُّجُومِ

49  And glorify Him during the night, and at the receding of the stars.