
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ أَنْ أَنْذِرْ قَوْمَكَ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ

1  We sent Noah to his people: "Warn your people before there comes upon them a painful punishment."

٢  قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ

2  He said, "O my people, I am to you a clear warner.

٣  أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ وَأَطِيعُونِ

3  Worship God and reverence Him, and obey me.

٤  يَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ مِنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ وَيُؤَخِّرْكُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۚ إِنَّ أَجَلَ اللَّهِ إِذَا جَاءَ لَا يُؤَخَّرُ ۖ لَوْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ

4  And He will forgive you of your sins, and reprieve you until a stated term. God's term cannot be deferred once it has arrived, if you only knew."

٥  قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُ قَوْمِي لَيْلًا وَنَهَارًا

5  He said, "My Lord, I have called my people night and day.

٦  فَلَمْ يَزِدْهُمْ دُعَائِي إِلَّا فِرَارًا

6  But my call added only to their flight.

٧  وَإِنِّي كُلَّمَا دَعَوْتُهُمْ لِتَغْفِرَ لَهُمْ جَعَلُوا أَصَابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَاسْتَغْشَوْا ثِيَابَهُمْ وَأَصَرُّوا وَاسْتَكْبَرُوا اسْتِكْبَارًا

7  Whenever I called them to Your forgiveness, they thrust their fingers into their ears, and wrapped themselves in their garments, and insisted, and became more and more arrogant.

٨  ثُمَّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُهُمْ جِهَارًا

8  Then I called them openly.

٩  ثُمَّ إِنِّي أَعْلَنْتُ لَهُمْ وَأَسْرَرْتُ لَهُمْ إِسْرَارًا

9  Then I appealed to them publicly, and I spoke to them privately.

١٠  فَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا

10  I said, 'Ask your Lord for forgiveness; He is Forgiving.

١١  يُرْسِلِ السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَارًا

11  He will let loose the sky upon you in torrents.

١٢  وَيُمْدِدْكُمْ بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ أَنْهَارًا

12  And provide you with wealth and children, and allot for you gardens, and allot for you rivers.

١٣  مَا لَكُمْ لَا تَرْجُونَ لِلَّهِ وَقَارًا

13  What is the matter with you, that you do not appreciate God's Greatness?

١٤  وَقَدْ خَلَقَكُمْ أَطْوَارًا

14  Although He created you in stages.

١٥  أَلَمْ تَرَوْا كَيْفَ خَلَقَ اللَّهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا

15  Do you not realize that God created seven heavens in layers?

١٦  وَجَعَلَ الْقَمَرَ فِيهِنَّ نُورًا وَجَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ سِرَاجًا

16  And He set the moon in their midst for light, and He made the sun a lamp.

١٧  وَاللَّهُ أَنْبَتَكُمْ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ نَبَاتًا

17  And God germinated you from the earth like plants.

١٨  ثُمَّ يُعِيدُكُمْ فِيهَا وَيُخْرِجُكُمْ إِخْرَاجًا

18  Then He will return you into it, and will bring you out again.

١٩  وَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ بِسَاطًا

19  And God made the earth a spread for you.

٢٠  لِتَسْلُكُوا مِنْهَا سُبُلًا فِجَاجًا

20  That you may travel its diverse roads.'"

٢١  قَالَ نُوحٌ رَبِّ إِنَّهُمْ عَصَوْنِي وَاتَّبَعُوا مَنْ لَمْ يَزِدْهُ مَالُهُ وَوَلَدُهُ إِلَّا خَسَارًا

21  Noah said, "My Lord, they have defied me, and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in perdition."

٢٢  وَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا كُبَّارًا

22  And they schemed outrageous schemes.

٢٣  وَقَالُوا لَا تَذَرُنَّ آلِهَتَكُمْ وَلَا تَذَرُنَّ وَدًّا وَلَا سُوَاعًا وَلَا يَغُوثَ وَيَعُوقَ وَنَسْرًا

23  And they said, "Do not give up your gods; do not give up Wadd, nor Souwa, nor Yaghoos, and Yaooq, and Nassr.

٢٤  وَقَدْ أَضَلُّوا كَثِيرًا ۖ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا ضَلَالًا

24  They have misled many, so do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion."

٢٥  مِمَّا خَطِيئَاتِهِمْ أُغْرِقُوا فَأُدْخِلُوا نَارًا فَلَمْ يَجِدُوا لَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَنْصَارًا

25  Because of their wrongs, they were drowned, and were hurled into a Fire. They did not find apart from God any helpers.

٢٦  وَقَالَ نُوحٌ رَبِّ لَا تَذَرْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ دَيَّارًا

26  Noah said, "My Lord, do not leave of the unbelievers a single dweller on earth.

٢٧  إِنَّكَ إِنْ تَذَرْهُمْ يُضِلُّوا عِبَادَكَ وَلَا يَلِدُوا إِلَّا فَاجِرًا كَفَّارًا

27  If You leave them, they will mislead your servants, and will breed only wicked unbelievers.

٢٨  رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِمَنْ دَخَلَ بَيْتِيَ مُؤْمِنًا وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا تَبَارًا

28  My Lord! Forgive me and my parents, and anyone who enters my home in faith, and all the believing men and believing women; and do not increase the wrongdoers except in perdition."