
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  ق ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ

1  Qaf. By the Glorious Quran.

٢  بَلْ عَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ فَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا شَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ

2  They marveled that a warner has come to them from among them. The disbelievers say, "This is something strange.

٣  أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا ۖ ذَٰلِكَ رَجْعٌ بَعِيدٌ

3  When we have died and become dust? This is a farfetched return."

٤  قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنْقُصُ الْأَرْضُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَعِنْدَنَا كِتَابٌ حَفِيظٌ

4  We know what the earth consumes of them, and with Us is a comprehensive book.

٥  بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ فَهُمْ فِي أَمْرٍ مَرِيجٍ

5  But they denied the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a confused state.

٦  أَفَلَمْ يَنْظُرُوا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ فَوْقَهُمْ كَيْفَ بَنَيْنَاهَا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا وَمَا لَهَا مِنْ فُرُوجٍ

6  Have they not observed the sky above them, how We constructed it, and decorated it, and it has no cracks?

٧  وَالْأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ

7  And the earth, how We spread it out, and set on it mountains, and grew in it all kinds of delightful pairs?

٨  تَبْصِرَةً وَذِكْرَىٰ لِكُلِّ عَبْدٍ مُنِيبٍ

8  A lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper.

٩  وَنَزَّلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً مُبَارَكًا فَأَنْبَتْنَا بِهِ جَنَّاتٍ وَحَبَّ الْحَصِيدِ

9  And We brought down from the sky blessed water, and produced with it gardens and grain to harvest.

١٠  وَالنَّخْلَ بَاسِقَاتٍ لَهَا طَلْعٌ نَضِيدٌ

10  And the soaring palm trees, with clustered dates.

١١  رِزْقًا لِلْعِبَادِ ۖ وَأَحْيَيْنَا بِهِ بَلْدَةً مَيْتًا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ الْخُرُوجُ

11  As sustenance for the servants. And We revive thereby a dead town. Likewise is the resurrection.

١٢  كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ وَأَصْحَابُ الرَّسِّ وَثَمُودُ

12  Before them the people of Noah denied the truth, and so did the dwellers of Russ, and Thamood.

١٣  وَعَادٌ وَفِرْعَوْنُ وَإِخْوَانُ لُوطٍ

13  And Aad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot.

١٤  وَأَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ وَقَوْمُ تُبَّعٍ ۚ كُلٌّ كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ وَعِيدِ

14  And the Dwellers of the Woods, and the people of Tubba. They all rejected the messengers, so My threat came true.

١٥  أَفَعَيِينَا بِالْخَلْقِ الْأَوَّلِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ فِي لَبْسٍ مِنْ خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ

15  Were We fatigued by the first creation? But they are in doubt of a new creation.

١٦  وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ ۖ وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ

16  We created the human being, and We know what his soul whispers to him. We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.

١٧  إِذْ يَتَلَقَّى الْمُتَلَقِّيَانِ عَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ

17  As the two receivers receive, seated to the right and to the left.

١٨  مَا يَلْفِظُ مِنْ قَوْلٍ إِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ

18  Not a word does he utter, but there is a watcher by him, ready.

١٩  وَجَاءَتْ سَكْرَةُ الْمَوْتِ بِالْحَقِّ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ مَا كُنْتَ مِنْهُ تَحِيدُ

19  The daze of death has come in truth: "This is what you tried to evade."

٢٠  وَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْوَعِيدِ

20  And the Trumpet is blown: "This is the Promised Day."

٢١  وَجَاءَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَعَهَا سَائِقٌ وَشَهِيدٌ

21  And every soul will come forward, accompanied by a driver and a witness.

٢٢  لَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَٰذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ

22  "You were in neglect of this, so We lifted your screen from you, and your vision today is keen."

٢٣  وَقَالَ قَرِينُهُ هَٰذَا مَا لَدَيَّ عَتِيدٌ

23  And His escort will say, "This is what I have ready with me."

٢٤  أَلْقِيَا فِي جَهَنَّمَ كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ

24  "Throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever.

٢٥  مَنَّاعٍ لِلْخَيْرِ مُعْتَدٍ مُرِيبٍ

25  Preventer of good, aggressor, doubter.

٢٦  الَّذِي جَعَلَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ فَأَلْقِيَاهُ فِي الْعَذَابِ الشَّدِيدِ

26  Who fabricated another god with God; toss him into the intense agony."

٢٧  قَالَ قَرِينُهُ رَبَّنَا مَا أَطْغَيْتُهُ وَلَٰكِنْ كَانَ فِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ

27  His escort will say, "Our Lord, I did not make him rebel, but he was far astray."

٢٨  قَالَ لَا تَخْتَصِمُوا لَدَيَّ وَقَدْ قَدَّمْتُ إِلَيْكُمْ بِالْوَعِيدِ

28  He will say, "Do not feud in My presence-I had warned you in advance.

٢٩  مَا يُبَدَّلُ الْقَوْلُ لَدَيَّ وَمَا أَنَا بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ

29  The decree from Me will not be changed, and I am not unjust to the servants."

٣٠  يَوْمَ نَقُولُ لِجَهَنَّمَ هَلِ امْتَلَأْتِ وَتَقُولُ هَلْ مِنْ مَزِيدٍ

30  On the Day when We will say to Hell, "Are you full?" And it will say, "Are there any more?"

٣١  وَأُزْلِفَتِ الْجَنَّةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ غَيْرَ بَعِيدٍ

31  And Paradise will be brought closer to the pious, not far away.

٣٢  هَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِكُلِّ أَوَّابٍ حَفِيظٍ

32  "This is what you were promised-for every careful penitent.

٣٣  مَنْ خَشِيَ الرَّحْمَٰنَ بِالْغَيْبِ وَجَاءَ بِقَلْبٍ مُنِيبٍ

33  Who inwardly feared the Most Gracious, and came with a repentant heart.

٣٤  ادْخُلُوهَا بِسَلَامٍ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْخُلُودِ

34  Enter it in peace. This is the Day of Eternity."

٣٥  لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ فِيهَا وَلَدَيْنَا مَزِيدٌ

35  Therein they will have whatever they desire-and We have even more.

٣٦  وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ هُمْ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُمْ بَطْشًا فَنَقَّبُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ هَلْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ

36  How many generations before them, who were more powerful than they, did We destroy? They explored the lands-was there any escape?

٣٧  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَذِكْرَىٰ لِمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ أَوْ أَلْقَى السَّمْعَ وَهُوَ شَهِيدٌ

37  In that is a reminder for whoever possesses a heart, or cares to listen and witness.

٣٨  وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ وَمَا مَسَّنَا مِنْ لُغُوبٍ

38  We created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days, and no fatigue touched Us.

٣٩  فَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ الْغُرُوبِ

39  So endure what they say, and proclaim the praises of your Lord before the rising of the sun, and before sunset.

٤٠  وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَأَدْبَارَ السُّجُودِ

40  And glorify Him during the night, and at the end of devotions.

٤١  وَاسْتَمِعْ يَوْمَ يُنَادِ الْمُنَادِ مِنْ مَكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ

41  And listen for the Day when the caller calls from a nearby place.

٤٢  يَوْمَ يَسْمَعُونَ الصَّيْحَةَ بِالْحَقِّ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْخُرُوجِ

42  The Day when they will hear the Shout in all truth. That is the Day of Emergence.

٤٣  إِنَّا نَحْنُ نُحْيِي وَنُمِيتُ وَإِلَيْنَا الْمَصِيرُ

43  It is We who control life and death, and to Us is the destination.

٤٤  يَوْمَ تَشَقَّقُ الْأَرْضُ عَنْهُمْ سِرَاعًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ حَشْرٌ عَلَيْنَا يَسِيرٌ

44  The Day when the earth will crack for them at once. That is an easy gathering for Us.

٤٥  نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ ۖ وَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِجَبَّارٍ ۖ فَذَكِّرْ بِالْقُرْآنِ مَنْ يَخَافُ وَعِيدِ

45  We are fully aware of what they say, and you are not a dictator over them. So remind by the Quran whoever fears My warning.