
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

١  ص ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ ذِي الذِّكْرِ

1  Saad. By the renowned Quran.

٢  بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ

2  Those who disbelieve are steeped in arrogance and defiance.

٣  كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ فَنَادَوْا وَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ

3  How many generations have We destroyed before them? They cried out when it was too late to escape.

٤  وَعَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا سَاحِرٌ كَذَّابٌ

4  And they marveled that a warner has come to them from among them. The disbelievers said, "This is a lying magician."

٥  أَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عُجَابٌ

5  "Did he turn all the gods into one God? This is something strange."

٦  وَانْطَلَقَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْهُمْ أَنِ امْشُوا وَاصْبِرُوا عَلَىٰ آلِهَتِكُمْ ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ يُرَادُ

6  The notables among them announced: "Go on, and hold fast to your gods. This is something planned.

٧  مَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَٰذَا فِي الْمِلَّةِ الْآخِرَةِ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا اخْتِلَاقٌ

7  We never heard of this in the former faith. This is nothing but a fabrication.

٨  أَأُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا ۚ بَلْ هُمْ فِي شَكٍّ مِنْ ذِكْرِي ۖ بَلْ لَمَّا يَذُوقُوا عَذَابِ

8  Was the message sent down to him, out of all of us?" In fact, they are doubtful of My warning. In fact, they have not yet tasted My punishment.

٩  أَمْ عِنْدَهُمْ خَزَائِنُ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّكَ الْعَزِيزِ الْوَهَّابِ

9  Or do they possess the treasuries of the mercy of your Lord-the Majestic, the Giver?

١٠  أَمْ لَهُمْ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ فَلْيَرْتَقُوا فِي الْأَسْبَابِ

10  Or do they possess the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and what is between them? Then let them ascend the ropes.

١١  جُنْدٌ مَا هُنَالِكَ مَهْزُومٌ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ

11  An army of confederates will be defeated there.

١٢  كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ وَعَادٌ وَفِرْعَوْنُ ذُو الْأَوْتَادِ

12  Before them the people of Noah denied the truth; as did Aad, and Pharaoh of the Stakes.

١٣  وَثَمُودُ وَقَوْمُ لُوطٍ وَأَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ الْأَحْزَابُ

13  And Thamood, and the people of Lot, and the dwellers of the Woods-these were the confederates.

١٤  إِنْ كُلٌّ إِلَّا كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ عِقَابِ

14  None of them but denied the messengers, so My retribution was deserved.

١٥  وَمَا يَنْظُرُ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً مَا لَهَا مِنْ فَوَاقٍ

15  These can expect only a single scream, from which there is no recovery.

١٦  وَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا عَجِّلْ لَنَا قِطَّنَا قَبْلَ يَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ

16  And they say, "Our Lord, hasten Your writ upon us, before the Day of Account."

١٧  اصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَاذْكُرْ عَبْدَنَا دَاوُودَ ذَا الْأَيْدِ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ

17  Be patient in the face of what they say, and mention Our servant David, the resourceful. He was obedient.

١٨  إِنَّا سَخَّرْنَا الْجِبَالَ مَعَهُ يُسَبِّحْنَ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْإِشْرَاقِ

18  We committed the mountains to glorify with him, in the evening and at daybreak.

١٩  وَالطَّيْرَ مَحْشُورَةً ۖ كُلٌّ لَهُ أَوَّابٌ

19  And the birds, gathered together. All obedient to him.

٢٠  وَشَدَدْنَا مُلْكَهُ وَآتَيْنَاهُ الْحِكْمَةَ وَفَصْلَ الْخِطَابِ

20  And We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and decisive speech.

٢١  وَهَلْ أَتَاكَ نَبَأُ الْخَصْمِ إِذْ تَسَوَّرُوا الْمِحْرَابَ

21  Has the story of the two disputants reached you? When they scaled the sanctuary?

٢٢  إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَىٰ دَاوُودَ فَفَزِعَ مِنْهُمْ ۖ قَالُوا لَا تَخَفْ ۖ خَصْمَانِ بَغَىٰ بَعْضُنَا عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ فَاحْكُمْ بَيْنَنَا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تُشْطِطْ وَاهْدِنَا إِلَىٰ سَوَاءِ الصِّرَاطِ

22  When they entered upon David, and he was startled by them. They said, "Do not fear. Two disputants; one of us has wronged the other; so judge between us fairly, and do not be biased, and guide us to the straight way."

٢٣  إِنَّ هَٰذَا أَخِي لَهُ تِسْعٌ وَتِسْعُونَ نَعْجَةً وَلِيَ نَعْجَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فَقَالَ أَكْفِلْنِيهَا وَعَزَّنِي فِي الْخِطَابِ

23  "This brother of mine has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe, and he said, 'Entrust it to me,' and he pressured me with words."

٢٤  قَالَ لَقَدْ ظَلَمَكَ بِسُؤَالِ نَعْجَتِكَ إِلَىٰ نِعَاجِهِ ۖ وَإِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الْخُلَطَاءِ لَيَبْغِي بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَقَلِيلٌ مَا هُمْ ۗ وَظَنَّ دَاوُودُ أَنَّمَا فَتَنَّاهُ فَاسْتَغْفَرَ رَبَّهُ وَخَرَّ رَاكِعًا وَأَنَابَ ۩

24  He said, "He has done you wrong by asking your ewe in addition to his ewes. Many partners take advantage of one another, except those who believe and do good deeds, but these are so few." David realized that We were testing him, so he sought forgiveness from his Lord, and fell down to his knees, and repented.

٢٥  فَغَفَرْنَا لَهُ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ وَإِنَّ لَهُ عِنْدَنَا لَزُلْفَىٰ وَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ

25  So We forgave him that. And for him is nearness to Us, and a good place of return.

٢٦  يَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَاحْكُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَىٰ فَيُضِلَّكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَضِلُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ بِمَا نَسُوا يَوْمَ الْحِسَابِ

26  "O David, We made you a ruler in the land, so judge between the people with justice, and do not follow desire, lest it diverts you from God's path. Those who stray from God's path will have a painful punishment, for having ignored the Day of Account."

٢٧  وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۚ فَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنَ النَّارِ

27  We did not create the heaven and the earth and everything between them in vain. That is the assumption of those who disbelieve-so woe to those who disbelieve because of the Fire.

٢٨  أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَالْمُفْسِدِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الْمُتَّقِينَ كَالْفُجَّارِ

28  Or are We to treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who make trouble on earth? Or are We to treat the pious like the shameless?

٢٩  كِتَابٌ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ مُبَارَكٌ لِيَدَّبَّرُوا آيَاتِهِ وَلِيَتَذَكَّرَ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ

29  A blessed Book that We sent down to you, that they may ponder its Verses, and for those with intelligence to take heed.

٣٠  وَوَهَبْنَا لِدَاوُودَ سُلَيْمَانَ ۚ نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ

30  And We granted David, Solomon, an excellent servant. He was penitent.

٣١  إِذْ عُرِضَ عَلَيْهِ بِالْعَشِيِّ الصَّافِنَاتُ الْجِيَادُ

31  When the beautiful horses were paraded before him in the evening.

٣٢  فَقَالَ إِنِّي أَحْبَبْتُ حُبَّ الْخَيْرِ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّي حَتَّىٰ تَوَارَتْ بِالْحِجَابِ

32  He said, "I have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my Lord-until it disappeared behind the veil.

٣٣  رُدُّوهَا عَلَيَّ ۖ فَطَفِقَ مَسْحًا بِالسُّوقِ وَالْأَعْنَاقِ

33  Bring them back to me." And he began caressing their legs and necks.

٣٤  وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا سُلَيْمَانَ وَأَلْقَيْنَا عَلَىٰ كُرْسِيِّهِ جَسَدًا ثُمَّ أَنَابَ

34  We tested Solomon, and placed a body on his throne; then he repented.

٣٥  قَالَ رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَهَبْ لِي مُلْكًا لَا يَنْبَغِي لِأَحَدٍ مِنْ بَعْدِي ۖ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْوَهَّابُ

35  He said, "My Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingdom never to be attained by anyone after me. You are the Giver."

٣٦  فَسَخَّرْنَا لَهُ الرِّيحَ تَجْرِي بِأَمْرِهِ رُخَاءً حَيْثُ أَصَابَ

36  So We placed the wind at his service, blowing gently by his command, wherever he directed.

٣٧  وَالشَّيَاطِينَ كُلَّ بَنَّاءٍ وَغَوَّاصٍ

37  And the demons-every builder and diver.

٣٨  وَآخَرِينَ مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الْأَصْفَادِ

38  And others fettered in chains.

٣٩  هَٰذَا عَطَاؤُنَا فَامْنُنْ أَوْ أَمْسِكْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ

39  "This is Our gift; so give generously, or withhold; without account."

٤٠  وَإِنَّ لَهُ عِنْدَنَا لَزُلْفَىٰ وَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ

40  For him is nearness to Us, and a beautiful resort.

٤١  وَاذْكُرْ عَبْدَنَا أَيُّوبَ إِذْ نَادَىٰ رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَسَّنِيَ الشَّيْطَانُ بِنُصْبٍ وَعَذَابٍ

41  And mention Our servant Job, when he called out to his Lord, "Satan has afflicted me with hardship and pain."

٤٢  ارْكُضْ بِرِجْلِكَ ۖ هَٰذَا مُغْتَسَلٌ بَارِدٌ وَشَرَابٌ

42  "Stamp with your foot-here is cool water to wash with, and to drink."

٤٣  وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ أَهْلَهُ وَمِثْلَهُمْ مَعَهُمْ رَحْمَةً مِنَّا وَذِكْرَىٰ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ

43  And We restored his family for him, and their like with them; as a mercy from Us, and a lesson for those who possess insight.

٤٤  وَخُذْ بِيَدِكَ ضِغْثًا فَاضْرِبْ بِهِ وَلَا تَحْنَثْ ۗ إِنَّا وَجَدْنَاهُ صَابِرًا ۚ نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ

44  "Take with your hand a bundle, and strike with it, and do not break your oath." We found him patient. What an excellent servant! He was obedient.

٤٥  وَاذْكُرْ عِبَادَنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ أُولِي الْأَيْدِي وَالْأَبْصَارِ

45  And mention Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-endowed with ability and vision.

٤٦  إِنَّا أَخْلَصْنَاهُمْ بِخَالِصَةٍ ذِكْرَى الدَّارِ

46  We distinguished them with a distinct quality: the remembrance of the Home.

٤٧  وَإِنَّهُمْ عِنْدَنَا لَمِنَ الْمُصْطَفَيْنَ الْأَخْيَارِ

47  To Us they are among the chosen, the outstanding.

٤٨  وَاذْكُرْ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَالْيَسَعَ وَذَا الْكِفْلِ ۖ وَكُلٌّ مِنَ الْأَخْيَارِ

48  And mention Ishmael, Elisha, and Ezekiel; all are among the outstanding.

٤٩  هَٰذَا ذِكْرٌ ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ لَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ

49  This is a reminder. The devout will have a good place of return.

٥٠  جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ مُفَتَّحَةً لَهُمُ الْأَبْوَابُ

50  The Gardens of Eden, with their doors wide-open for them.

٥١  مُتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا يَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِفَاكِهَةٍ كَثِيرَةٍ وَشَرَابٍ

51  Relaxing therein, and calling for abundant fruit and beverage.

٥٢  وَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ أَتْرَابٌ

52  With them will be attendants with modest gaze, of same age.

٥٣  هَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ

53  This is what you are promised for the Day of Account.

٥٤  إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَرِزْقُنَا مَا لَهُ مِنْ نَفَادٍ

54  Such is Our bounty, inexhaustible.

٥٥  هَٰذَا ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلطَّاغِينَ لَشَرَّ مَآبٍ

55  All This. But the transgressors will have a miserable return.

٥٦  جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا فَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ

56  Hell; in which they will roast; what a miserable abode!

٥٧  هَٰذَا فَلْيَذُوقُوهُ حَمِيمٌ وَغَسَّاقٌ

57  All this. Let them taste it-boiling and bitter cold.

٥٨  وَآخَرُ مِنْ شَكْلِهِ أَزْوَاجٌ

58  And similar torments of diverse kinds.

٥٩  هَٰذَا فَوْجٌ مُقْتَحِمٌ مَعَكُمْ ۖ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ صَالُو النَّارِ

59  "This is a crowd rushing headlong with you." There is no welcome for them. They will be scorched by the Fire.

٦٠  قَالُوا بَلْ أَنْتُمْ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِكُمْ ۖ أَنْتُمْ قَدَّمْتُمُوهُ لَنَا ۖ فَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ

60  They will say, "But it is you! There is no welcome for you! It is you who brought it upon us! What a miserable end!"

٦١  قَالُوا رَبَّنَا مَنْ قَدَّمَ لَنَا هَٰذَا فَزِدْهُ عَذَابًا ضِعْفًا فِي النَّارِ

61  They will say, "Our Lord, whoever brought this upon us, give him double torment in the Fire."

٦٢  وَقَالُوا مَا لَنَا لَا نَرَىٰ رِجَالًا كُنَّا نَعُدُّهُمْ مِنَ الْأَشْرَارِ

62  And they will say, "What is it with us that we do not see men we used to count among the wicked?

٦٣  أَتَّخَذْنَاهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا أَمْ زَاغَتْ عَنْهُمُ الْأَبْصَارُ

63  Did we take them for mockery, or have our eyes swerved from them?

٦٤  إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ لَحَقٌّ تَخَاصُمُ أَهْلِ النَّارِ

64  This is certainly true-the feuding of the people of the Fire.

٦٥  قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَنَا مُنْذِرٌ ۖ وَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ

65  Say, "I am only a warner, and there is no god except God-the One, the Conqueror.

٦٦  رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ

66  The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them; the Mighty, the Forgiver."

٦٧  قُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ

67  Say, "It is a message of great importance.

٦٨  أَنْتُمْ عَنْهُ مُعْرِضُونَ

68  From which you are turning away.

٦٩  مَا كَانَ لِيَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ

69  I have no knowledge of the Highest Assembly as they dispute.

٧٠  إِنْ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ إِلَّا أَنَّمَا أَنَا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ

70  It is only revealed to me that I am a clear warner."

٧١  إِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ طِينٍ

71  Your Lord said to the angels, "I am creating a human being from clay.

٧٢  فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ سَاجِدِينَ

72  When I have formed him, and breathed into him of My spirit, fall prostrate before him.

٧٣  فَسَجَدَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ

73  So the angels fell prostrate, all of them.

٧٤  إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ اسْتَكْبَرَ وَكَانَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ

74  Except for Satan. He was too proud, and one of the faithless.

٧٥  قَالَ يَا إِبْلِيسُ مَا مَنَعَكَ أَنْ تَسْجُدَ لِمَا خَلَقْتُ بِيَدَيَّ ۖ أَسْتَكْبَرْتَ أَمْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الْعَالِينَ

75  He said, "O Satan, what prevented you from prostrating before what I created with My Own hands? Are you too proud, or were you one of the exalted?"

٧٦  قَالَ أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِنْهُ ۖ خَلَقْتَنِي مِنْ نَارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ

76  He said, "I am better than he; You created me from fire, and You created him from clay."

٧٧  قَالَ فَاخْرُجْ مِنْهَا فَإِنَّكَ رَجِيمٌ

77  He said, "Then get out of here! You are an outcast!

٧٨  وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكَ لَعْنَتِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ

78  And My curse will be upon you until the Day of Judgment."

٧٩  قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنْظِرْنِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ

79  He said, "Lord, defer me until the Day they are resurrected."

٨٠  قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنَ الْمُنْظَرِينَ

80  He said, "You are one of those deferred.

٨١  إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ

81  Until the Day of the Time Appointed."

٨٢  قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

82  He said, "By Your majesty, I will seduce them all.

٨٣  إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ

83  Except for your loyal servants among them."

٨٤  قَالَ فَالْحَقُّ وَالْحَقَّ أَقُولُ

84  He said, "The truth is, and I say the truth.

٨٥  لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنْكَ وَمِمَّنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ

85  I will fill Hell with you, and with every one of them who follows you."

٨٦  قُلْ مَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّفِينَ

86  Say, "I ask of you no wage for this, and I am not a pretender.

٨٧  إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِلْعَالَمِينَ

87  It is but a reminder to mankind.

٨٨  وَلَتَعْلَمُنَّ نَبَأَهُ بَعْدَ حِينٍ

88  And you will know its message after a while."